Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2016

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2016

Demon or Human: The Various Identities of the
Vampire Figure in Literary Narratives
Regina Keyha Smith
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Smith, Regina Keyha, "Demon or Human: The Various Identities of the Vampire Figure in Literary Narratives" (2016). Senior Projects
Spring 2016. Paper 371.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2016/371

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2016 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

1

Demon or Human: The Various Identities of the Vampire Figure in Literary
Narratives

Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Regina Smith

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2016

2

3

Acknowledgements
To my dear Aunt,
Thank you for introducing me to the fantastic world of Literature. When I was young and
wrote my random stories, you supported me in every effort. You provided me with
journals and pens, and you listened to every story I told. You bought me books to read
and listened as I read aloud. Without you this could never have been possible and so, I
thank and love you dearly.
With love,
Regina (Bena)
I would like to give a special thanks to my advisor Donna Grover. I never knew about the
world of Gothic Literature. It wasn’t until Bard that I realized these novels had a specific
genre and without you this project would have flopped. So thank you for being both an
emotional support and an advisor throughout my time here at Bard. It was your class
during my first year that I decided to be a Literature major and look at me now!
Further acknowledgements: Barbara Sarah, Imani Jones,Caitlin Welch, Cat Prager,
Tiffany Leung, D.J Douglas, Angie Del Arca, Montanez Baugh, Maya Knight, Imani
Smith, Eric Arroyo, Dominika Stokes, Rachel Parker, Genevieve Pierre and Tytravia
(Tootie) Smith.
All of you have been a huge support during my time here at Bard and I appreciate you
all!
Also, thanks you Bard Stevenson library and Betsey Cawley for providing help with my
senior project!

4
Table of Contents
Introduction…………………………………………………………………….……....5
Chapter 1 Societal Anxieties and the manifestation of the Vampire in Dracula
………………………………………………………………………………………..…10
Chapter 2 Anne Rice’s Sexual Revolution of the Vampire
………………………………………………………………………………………..…36
Chapter 3 The Romantic Vampire figure in Twilight
…..………………………………………………………………………………….…..59
Conclusion…..……………………………………………………………………...….81
Bibliography…..……………………………………………………………….…...….84

5
“You think I come from the devil?”1
What exactly is a vampire? They are often thought of the living undead or an
animated corpse that originated from Transylvania. Regardless of its true nature, the
vampire is hard to define and with its reappearance in several contemporary novels, it is
time to take a closer look at this creature of the night. First, the vampire has always been
a mysterious figure due its versatile role within myth and lore. This versatility is
demonstrated in its ability to appear in several different literary texts as an antagonist or
protagonist, a demon or angel, and even as the villain or hero. Second, the vampire’s
transformative nature and mimicry is a constant reminder of its adaptive nature in society.
The creature is in constant change depending on the nature of the audience, time period,
and author. The vampire is malleable in nature and myth, the vampire's nature is in
constant change and the plot will follow whatever characteristics the creature adopts onto
itself. For example, if the vampire is characterized as a being going through an existential
crisis then the narrative will follow this path in hopes of the vampire finding peace.
The most difficult circumstance when it comes to the vampire in literary texts is
the difficulty in finding the origin story. The origin story is difficult to locate because
there is no singular timeline for the creature of the night. For instance, many will argue
that Dracula is the origin story for vampires; however, there are stories that have
creatures that are similarly described. For example, the poem, “The Giaour” by Lord
Byron was published before Dracula in 1813.

1

Rice, Anne Interview with The Vampire,

6
But first, on earth as Vampire sent, 755
Thy corse shall from its tomb be rent –
Then ghastly haunt thy native place,
And suck the blood of all thy race; 758
There from thy daughter, sister, wife,
At midnight drain the stream of life; 760
Yet loathe the banquet which perforce
Must feed thy livid living corse –
Thy victims ere they yet expire
Shall know the dæmon for their sire...
Wet with thine own best blood shall drip 781
Thy gnashing tooth and haggard lip;
Then stalking to thy sullen grave –
Go – and with Gouls and Afrits rave;
Till these in horror shrink away 785
From Spectre more accursed than they!2
Vampirism is the curse that awaits the human in this text. This “vampyre”3 served as a
dark double, a figure is forced to walk the earth as the living undead as a punishment that
was imposed on the “Giaour.” Also, the vampyre serves as the exoticized “other”, one
whose passions and actions condemn him as well. In a way, this “other” does appear in
Dracula, but not as an exoticized other; the vampire is an imposing and dangerous figure.
It depicts vampirism as a disruption to societal order. So, what is vampirism and why is it
imposing itself on human society?
Vampires are metaphorical figures, they are stand in for the larger fears in society.
It becomes metaphorical in that it takes the place of the unknown, the unexplained and
the unspeakable. The vampire is, of course, a more complex creature than just a metaphor
for someone that may lust after the unattainable or the forbidden. Instead, they become
representations of hidden anxieties. The anxieties can take the form of sexuality, power,
2
3

Lord Byron, “The Giaour” (1813)
Vampyre- olde English spelling of vampire

7
fear of the foreign or the other and can be the reflection of society or the author's' own
fears. The author and novel cannot completely exist or separate itself from one another;
this can be said for the historical narrative as it overlaps with the literary narrative.
Historical events, political movements, and shifts in power can manifest within
the literary text. The text is a manifestation of the author's imagination and this
imagination is influenced by their lives. In Stoker's Dracula, the vampire is a
manifestation of several anxieties that exist within Victorian England society and Stoker's
own feelings towards certain aspects of that time period. These anxieties seep through
each of the vampire narratives and though there are some consistencies, each novel has a
different set of anxieties. For example, who's to say that Anne Rice's atheism didn’t
influence the vampire's moral judgments and existential crisis within the Vampire
Chronicles series? What about Meyer’s Mormon background and its influence its
possible influence in Twilight? These texts are more contemporary than Dracula, but
there is a consistency in the role of the vampire. These texts despite their time period and
different authors are not mutually exclusive.
This senior thesis explores the various vampire myths that arise from a multilinear narrative. “The subsequent history of the vampire forms one long series of
appropriations, bluffs and creative forgeries.”4 There is no right way of studying the
vampire narrative and in fact, the vampires studied in this project follows the perspective
of male vampires. There are female vampires, such as Carmilla by Sheridan Le Fanu and
though Carmilla holds an important role in the vampire narrative she is not the focal
4

Butler, Erik. The Rise of the Vampire. London: Reaktion Books, 2013.

8
point. The novels chosen for this project were purposely picked for these main reasons:
the first being popularity. The vampire novels used are ingrained in popular society;
Dracula is often thought to be the first vampire narrative, Lestat is a pivotal point in the
shift in the image of the vampire and Twilight is the revival of the vampire in pop culture.
The second being: the differences in which vampires are portrayed in the narratives. Each
of these novels brings a different perspective to the vampire and helps in exploring the
question— what is the vampire? Finally: the vampires represent unique time periods,
which contribute the formation of the vampire. By using these texts one can discover
whether vampires are simply supernatural beings or a metaphorical entity that stands in
for something more complex.
This senior project delves deeper into the very nature of the vampire because the
concept of this creature is very complex, so complex that it simply cannot be categorized
as only a supernatural being or monster. In order to understand this creature of the night,
this project will trace the myth and narrative of the vampire. Furthermore, I would like to
argue that the vampires in the novels are a representation or manifestation of the author’s
own anxieties. The vampire exists outside human society; therefore, this excludes them
from participation in the social norm. In their current condition, they are a blank slate, a
state at which the author can write history, fears and explore certain concepts on their
own.
The first chapter focuses on Dracula, which will serve as the starting point in this
project. It is imperative that this is the text that begins this investigation due to its
notoriety in modern day society. The second chapter focuses on Lestat, a vampire from

9
France who soon finds himself in the Louisiana. This novel is important in not only its
geographical shift but also the shift in the perception and characterization of the vampire.
It also demonstrates the new anxieties that are reflected through the vampire during the
time period that the novel was written. The final chapter will be on Twilight, which is
similar to Dracula in its popularity and has spawned a fandom. Though other vampire
novels have been written after this particular narrative, the popularity of this franchise
deserves a critical eye and inclusion in exploring the vampire myth.
Overall, this project will explore the ways in which vampires are represented in
each of these literary texts. These literary texts serve as a reflection of the author’s own
personal desires and anxieties during their time period. In doing so, historical narrative
and the literary narrative are not mutually exclusive; instead, they intertwine and create a
complete vampire narrative. The vampire, a supernatural entity, stands in for the
unspeakable. This unspeakable mystery is disguised by the author, in which he/she then
chooses to represent and explore through the vampire figure. However, the vampire can
only mask the inevitable, which is merely the hidden desires that seep into their literary
texts as a result of the changing times.

10
Chapter One: Societal Anxieties and the manifestation of the Vampire in Dracula
The origin of the vampire has always been one of the greatest mysteries. From
their predatory nature to their dashing good looks, vampires are a supernatural
phenomenon that enthralls the mortal audience. The appearance of vampires in literary
texts is a fairly contemporary idea; its appearance in modern day literature is quite
common as if the formula for a proper story includes— a beginning, middle, end and
vampire. Despite the popularity of vampires, the origin of this supernatural being
continues to be contested. There’s an overwhelming need from today’s readers to trace
the vampire back to its roots, however vampiric novels are plentiful and many have
different histories. With more recent novels, like Twilight, the younger generation is
brought into the dark twisted fantasy of the supernatural world, but for the slightly older
generation, Dracula, seems like the story of origin. Bram Stoker’s vampire in the novel
Dracula reflects societal anxieties of not only the “Other,” but also serves as the
manifestation of forbidden sexual desires of women during the Victorian time period.
By analyzing the vampire in several novels such as Dracula, Carmilla, Twilight
and Lestat; the varying vampiric models assist in the discovery of what their presence
signifies in the text. It can be said that vampires represent the unspoken; a world of the
repressed, oppressed and tyrannized. The novel, Dracula, represents the unspeakable
sexual desires that vary from polygamy to an almost homoerotic subtext. This vampiric
image continues in which Stoker creates a dark twist on maternity and matrimonial
values that the characters engage in within the narrative. The vampire is a reflection of
personal desires and anxieties, an external supernatural entity that takes the place of the

11
unspeakable; the vampire masks the inevitable, hidden desires that seep into literary texts
as a result of the time period.
The origin of the vampire is commonly linked to Bram Stoker’s Dracula; the
popularity of the novel as well as it being a well-known book, are only a few reasons why
the novel is easily recognizable. In the novel, the vampires serve as a moral compass;
they have an animalistic freedom and wildness about them that makes it easier for them
to reside outside of society. Due to this reason, the vampires serve as antagonists to the
human protagonist characters, who are representative of the good and moralistic,
technologically advanced society. The different spaces within the novel also stand in
contrast to one another— the first being a technological London versus Castle Dracula.
The castle in which Count Dracula dwells is located far within a foreign territory;
Jonathan leaves the confines of English society to escape into the untamed land of the
“other.” The distance he travels is great; Jonathan travels from several major cities that
slowly lead him into the land of the unknown. His route is as follows— London via Paris,
Munich, Vienna, Budapest, Klausenburg and Bistritz, he arrives at the castle after being
picked up in the Borgo Pass by a mysterious driver, whom he later realizes as Count
Dracula. The route starts off with familiar cities that are identifiable, however Jonathan is
soon brought into the realm of the vampire, which exists in the untamed foreign East. The
home of Dracula follows the gothic trope; the location is very obscure and nothing is
distinguishable, the only feasible location that Jonathan mentions is the Carpathians,
meaning the mountains. The route descriptions limit any recognizable landmarks; instead
Stoker focuses on the untamable nature. Evocations of a wild and snow-covered

12
landscape ruled by howling wolves is daunting, but wolves that haunt the wilderness lit
by supernatural blue flames at night, is anything but welcoming. The castle is an
important space in the narrative because it is a space where forbidden temptations can
take place.
Castle Dracula is a space with many forbidden places; Dracula locks these places
shut before Jonathan’s arrival. The only rooms he has access to are his room and the
study area that contains several books, magazines and newspapers of varying subjects,
which include English law, geology and books that include customs and manners.
However, most of the castle is locked tight and Dracula warns Jonathan that sleeping
outside of his room would be unwise. For several nights Jonathan follows the Count’s
orders, but one particular night after opening one of the closed doors, Jonathan ignores
the Count’s warning and falls asleep in the forbidden chambers:
“I was now in a wing of the castle further to the right than the rooms I
knew and a storey lower down...the castle was built on the corner of a
great rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great
windows were placed here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not
reach, and consequently light and comfort, impossible to a position which
had to be guarded, were secured. To the west was a great valley, and then,
rising far away, great jagged mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the
sheer rock studded with mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in
cracks and crevices and crannies of the stone. This was evidently the
portion of the castle occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the
furniture had more an air of comfort than any I had seen.”5
In this chamber that Jonathan perceives to have once been a women’s chamber, it is now
a feminine space of decay. The room resides on wing that is “guarded” “jagged” and

5

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: Complete, Authoritative Text with
Biographical, Historical, and Cultural Contexts, Critical History, and
Essays from Contemporary Critical Perspectives. New York: Palgrave, 2002. (p.59)

13
“impregnable.” This is the same place where Jonathan encounters the three vampire
women that reside secretly in Count Dracula’s Castle.
Jonathan’s encounter with the women in the decaying space is parallel to the
women themselves, who are not proper ladies but rather temptresses. Within this
womanly space in the castle, Jonathan is overcome with a “burning desire” as the women
descend upon him. Jonathan’s interaction with the three seductive vampress transform
into a scene of intense sexual desire, hypersexualization and homoeroticism once Dracula
returns to the castle. The scene that unfolds, within the room, is one of intense sexual
desire that manifests as the women surround him and are delighted in giving him
“kisses.” The women urge one another to indulge in him, the language used is suitable for
the bedroom, their actions are described as “kisses” and not drinking. The intimacy of
kissing is more sensual rather than the animalistic nature involved when drinking
someone’s blood. The interaction between the three women and Jonathan almost
resembles an orgy as the women encourage one another,
“Go on! You are the first, and we shall follow; yours is the right to begin.’
The other added: —“He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all. I
lay there quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in agony of delightful
anticipation. The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the
movement of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet,
and sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a
bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in
blood...The fair girl went on her knees, and bent over me, fairly gloating.
There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling and
repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually licked her lips like an
animal..I closed my eyes in languorous ecstasy and waited — waited with
beating heart.”6 (P.61-62)

6

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.61-62

14

7

(Dracula’s seductress) fig.1

Stoker’s hypersexualization of these women, illustrate the fear and desire one feels when
faced with strong sexual desires; these feelings are not only unnatural but should be
feared. Jonathan reflects Stoker’s own anxieties on female sexuality in the femme fatale
archetype. Jonathan is anxious and anticipates contact with the women, during this
moment he is both “repulsed” and “thrilled” at what is about to take place. This moment
demonstrates a moral dilemma that Jonathan faces at the hands of such tempting women.
First, Jonathan is engaged to Mina, but is falling prey to three beautiful “voluptuous”

7

Dracula (1931), Browning Tod,

15
women. However, what is repulsive about their nature? The women are in control and
leave Jonathan spellbound as he works through his feelings of lust and desire.
Furthermore, this scene alludes to the fact that Jonathan may lose himself if he allows
these women to give him “kisses.” He is in a state of “ecstasy” which is almost orgasmic.
Currently, Jonathan is traversing through a forbidden territory that manifests within the
castle; this is due to the women that lurk within.
The women that reside within the castle are not the proper sort that would be seen
in public. They are almost equivalent to a prostitute in their lecherous ways, however
within the space of Dracula’s Castle they are able to act on their desires. Societal
standards do not influence nor curve the behavior of these women and so it can be said
that they exhibit some form of autonomy and freedom. However, this freedom is limited
and Dracula uses his power over the women as a way to control their behavior. The
women are prevented from feeding from him as Dracula exerts an enormous amount of
power as he disrupts the sexually charged scene. Stoker depicts Dracula as furious— his
intervention brings a physical, masculine violence when he uses force against the woman.
The “fair woman” was grasped by the neck as the Count threw her back in order to
prevent her from claiming the prize that she was once gloating over.
“With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman from him,
and then motioned to the others, as though he were beating them
back…In a voice which, though low and almost in a whisper,
seemed to cut through the air and then ring round the room as he
said: — “How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast
eyes on him when I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This man
belongs to me!”8

8

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.62

16
The quote inevitably does a role reversal; Jonathan is now the object of desire for
the Count. The forbiddingness in the scene now is now in regards to Jonathan’s
relationship with Count Dracula. Dracula claims possession of Jonathan from the women
that want to bear down on him and proceed to give him “kisses.” The violence inflicted
on the “fair woman” was to ensure that she knew that Jonathan was his and only his. If it
is possible to present homoeroticism in this text between Jonathan and Dracula, perhaps
his fangs are symbolic as a phallic object that wishes to stake claim in him through
biting/kisses. This is purely speculative, but this idea cannot be entirely dismissed due to
the scene that preceded Dracula’s intrusion and assertion of his male dominance. If so,
we can speculate that Stoker is exploring the dangers in homoeroticism and sexuality
pertaining to men and women.
Stoker explores gender dynamics in Dracula, which is not just shown through his
vampire characters, but human characters as well. The men and women in the novel fight
different battles; this takes the form of purity, emasculation, technology and intelligence.
The men strive to become heroes and the women fight to keep their purity and status.
Through the female characters Lucy Westenra and Mina Harker, Stoker creates this
image of an idealistic nature for both femininity and womanhood. The two friends stand
in opposition to one another and illustrate Stoker’s own anxieties of the female body and
sexuality. In the novel there is an ongoing battle between purity and innocence versus the
unholy and corrupt. The characters, both male and female, battle to control bestial urges
that threaten to overtake the characters. In order to explore these ideas of innocence in
corruption in the text, the first step in navigating these ideas on sexuality and corruption

17
lies within the women in the world of Dracula. Lucy Westenra and Mina Harker are
female archetypes that occupy a complicated space as they strive to fulfill their roles
during their time period. In contrast Mina and Lucy the three seductress from Castle
Dracula show a more foreboding and sinister side to female sexuality. Stoker’s
construction of women in Dracula in which we have the maternal nature of Mina, Lucy’s
dependency on masculine characters, and the overly sexualized nature of the three
seductress within Dracula’s Castle place them in situations of vulnerability and fall to
Stoker’s critique.
Lucy is the first female victim to fall prey to Dracula’s advances. In the novel, we
learn that several suitors pursue her; she is flustered by the fact that three of her suitors
proposed to her in just one day. Despite being in love with one of her many suitors, she is
attracted to and desires all three men. She questions the ideas behind marriage
expectations in what seems to be a scandalous question. “Why can’t they let a girl marry
three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble?”9 This question would never
be asked by Mina and is only asked by Lucy in what she suggests to be a polygamous
relationship. This type of relationship would be rejected by societal standards. In this
moment Stoker is addressing key moments in sexual anxiety during his time period, the
first being the act of sexual freedom of the female body or at least whimsical thinking
done by Lucy. The second is the act of polygamy that many would have turned their
noses up towards during the time period and the creation of Dracula. Lucy’s expression
of sexual desire is at odds with the typical Victorian female ideals, however, her desire

9

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.81

18
for a polygamous relationship hints more at her own empowerment. Stoker suggests that
Lucy’s desires are parallel to Dracula’s own relationship; Lucy has three suitors and
Dracula has three wives. The similarity in the number signifies that Lucy is closely in
relation to Dracula, who is a bestial “other” and insatiable being. However, it’s hard to
believe that there isn’t more of a dualism in place with sexuality, desire, and what was
acceptable in expressing. One must remember this as a time in which chastity was not
only expected, but desired so was the hidden inexpressible desires of the era.
These inexpressible desires are not easily discussed. Divorce, let alone polygamy,
weren’t casual topics to discuss in public, let alone in person with one of the more
reserved characters, like Mina Harker. This conversation shouldn’t take place between
characters with such high standing, but Lucy is a manifestation of those hidden sexual
desires that the characters in the novel strive to avoid. Lucy is described as one of the
outwardly pure and innocent characters; why is she one of the first to fall prey to Dracula
in the novel? Instead of thinking of her as falling prey to the criminal, Dracula, she is
instead more of a liberated woman. This is to say that, Lucy Westenra, who is inevitably
drained by Dracula and transformed into a vampire herself, may now act more freely and
openly in light of her newfound vampirism. This is the complete opposite of the once
beloved as Lucy Westenra, whose true nature was hidden behind a pretty face and white
dress.
The Lucy before the transformation was quite limited due to her standards and the
expectations placed on her as a woman. Most men flocked to her side and spared her
harsh words because she was thought to be dainty and pure. This however, is merely a

19
facade because Lucy desires something much more than just a monogamous relationship.
Reflecting back on the conversation about polygamy that she had with Mina, via mail,
Lucy discusses the freedom of women and her own lack of freedom. Perhaps this desire
for freedom made her an easy prey for Dracula. She states, “Oh, why must a man like that
be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who would worship the very ground
he trod on? I know I would if I were free--only I don’t want to be free.”10 Lucy
demonstrates two conflicting ideas in this sentence, the first being this idea of freedom as
not being in a romantic relationship. This freedom she talks about is the freedom to pick
and choose a partner; however she would like to have all three men as previously
mentioned. However, Lucy holds several aspects of male dependency such as ‘worship
the ground he trod on’ and “I don’t want to be free.’ Though she holds some notions of
ideas of sexual freedom, Lucy still relies on masculine figures. This is more noticeable
when Dracula targets and begins to feed from her; several male characters in the novel
strive to save her, yet fail miserably.
Lucy outwardly demonstrates a dualist nature as she represents old archetypal
ideas of femininity as well as a hidden sexual nature. Lucy’s character before her
metamorphosis into a vampiric body portrays an old-fashioned womanhood that relies on
her ability to be saved by masculine figures. Lucy both accepts and denies this
characterization of her character due to her performance of a respectable woman as she
masks her more sexual deviant side, which isn’t shown until her transition into a vampire.
However, this is not to say that she didn’t have these sexual desires to begin with, they’re

10

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.81

20
not openly demonstrated until her death and rebirth which then she openly expresses a
more uncovered sexual desire. The masking of Lucy’s desires is a complicated matter
because of her outward appearance of sweetness, which notably has been alluded to
through her ability to look “sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock.”11 These images of
Lucy are complex as they allow her the ability to appear as both a sweet, innocent and
desirable person, which is why Stoker takes great care in creating a transformed and
twisted image of that same purity.
Lucy’s purity is destroyed once she transitions into a creature of the night; her
transformation marks her transition from our beloved, sweet and innocent Lucy. She has
now become the seductress of the night and lures away the innocent children. With the
death of Lucy and her inevitable transformation into a vampire, Stoker illustrates the
dangers of uncontrolled female sexuality. Over time, Lucy began to exhibit signs of a
weakening body. The reason behind her illness was the blood loss she was experiencing
at the hands of Dracula, but Dr. Seward surmises this to be nothing more than Lucy
suffering from a mental illness. Whether this was practical diagnosis or not he reaches
this decision after merely conducting a blood test. This depicts the illness of women as
only being an illness of the mind. Lucy’s last moments were a result of her blood loss and
not from mental illness. However, this situation may have been avoided if Lucy would
have only obeyed Van Helsing’s orders in which he told her to keep the garlic around her
neck and the windows locked.

11

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.86

21
In the end it was inevitable that Lucy should die; her sexual desires were not
simply calmed by the thought of marriage, she desired more than the monogamous
relationship that was dictated by societal norms that stifled Victorian women. This
standardized restraint on Lucy left an opening that Dracula was able to douse Lucy’s
feeble attempt to cling to her life and innocence that warred against her rising sexuality.
Van Helsing gave several blood transfusions to Lucy before her death. By using each of
the men in her life, he was able to continuously fill her body with blood and their
essence. Lucy recognizes this essence when she claims to feel Arthur inside of her.
During this procedure Van Helsing did take more from Arthur, Lucy’s fiancé, by which
he explains, is the ‘appropriate’ amount. This claim by Van Helsing implies that Stoker is
placing and abiding by set behavioral boundaries set in place during the time period,
which meant certain things were perceived as being more appropriate than others. In this
case it would be the amount of blood, which places a behavioral limitation that these
human protagonists must abide by. This is presented yet again in the novel when Van
Helsing and Dr. Seward attempt to revive Lucy in the bathtub. The men remove Lucy
from the bed and place her “as she was” in the bathtub.12 The idea is minute and it’s
placement is during a time of intense climax, but it stands out due to the instructive
nature on the appropriateness in the ways that the men should care for her. They
demonstrate a gentleman like demeanor despite the fact that death is knocking at Lucy’s
door or similar to Dracula, barging through the window without an invitation.

12

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.161

22
The once human Lucy has lost the battle in calming her sexual desires. Stoker
creates the image of the vampiric Lucy, which is a manifestation of the excessiveness that
can exist within women. Lucy is a hypersexualized woman that is detrimental to
everyone around her. Lucy’s transformation into a creature of the night marks not only a
change in appearance, but also her behavior. In what was once the sweet and kind natured
young woman now resides a lecherous, sexualized Lucy Westenra. As she slips in
between the world of the living and undead, the description illustrates her transition into
what appears to be a corpse-like image. In the words of Dr. Seward, “she was
ghastly...her breath was painful to see or hear.”13 Lucy’s transformation is slowly
changing her appearance and behavior, as she steadily becomes something that is a
reflection of her internal nature; her true self is shown during her death.
Lucy’s death scene is her one of her last moments as an innocent woman— a
reflection of a pure Victorian woman, but is subject to a rebirth that will awaken in sexual
nature. Moments before her first death, when she is still a mortal being, she is overcome
by her own sexual desire and asks her fiancé, Arthur, to kiss her one last time. The scene
that this takes place in is a viable moment in the novel for several scenes in the future
draw on the same language, such as the issue in saving the soul and the newly awakened
sexual woman.
“Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me! “Arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who like me, had
been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by the
neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which I
was never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him
almost across the room. “Not for your life! he said; “not for your living
13

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.136

23
soul and hers!... “I kept my eyes on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw
a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth
champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed deeply.”14
Van Helsing violently separates Lucy and Arthur from one another in the same
similar fashion in which Dracula separates Jonathan from the vampiric woman. He
prohibits Arthur from kissing Lucy; he claims the kiss would have stolen his life and
soul. The parallels in both scenes suggest that men need to be saved from female
promiscuity. This scene captures the hypersexualization of Lucy, her loss of innocence
and her ability to participate in the vicious cycle of vampirism— which is her ability to
contaminate others as well. In this instance, what is being said about vampirism and
sexuality? The two terms are closely related in the context that Lucy is more open to
engaging in her sexual desires once these changes begin to take over the body. However,
this scene demonstrates how easily the male body can be tempted when it faces an object
of his desire; this is seen in Jonathan’s encounter with the three women in Dracula’s
Castle. In this instance it is Arthur who is easily seduced by his beloved as he fails to
recognize the change in her voice that both Van Helsing and Dr. Seward easily recognize
ring with an air of falsity. This change in her voice is hinting at the transformation of
Lucy into a more sexualized being while Lucy’s rage is a moment of uncontrolled
passion and lust. This moment of passion arose after her failure to indulge in a sexual
desire that was denied to her and this was only controlled in her moment of death; a
moment at which she could retain innocence and purity.

14

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.173

24
After Lucy’s death, her body began to change back into its familiar innocent state.
Only in death could her image of purity be controlled by the men that created this ideal
image of the women that had at one point of another captured their hearts.
“Some change had come back over her body. Death had given
back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks has recovered
some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their deadly
pallor.” 15
The return to her original appearance illustrates that Lucy has been reclaimed and
reverted back into an image of purity. A change had come over her body that made it
natural once again; her transformation implies that her humanity has been restored which
may illustrate that Lucy was beyond saving and only through death could she be truly
saved. Lucy’s corpse in its description indicates that she is both beautiful and chaste in
comparison to the corrupted beauty she held just before her death and when she awakens
as a creature of the night. The juxtaposition between purity and corruption is shown in the
text when the discussion of multiple marriages is once again discussed. Arthur believes
that his blood that ran through Lucy’s veins enabled him to them to be husband and wife.
Van Helsing finds this to be amusing and mentions to Dr. Seward that the donation of
blood from the three separate men would inevitably make Lucy a polygamist.
The implications made by Van Helsing suggest that Lucy, as a polygamist would
spoil her innocence and heighten her own sexuality and desire.
“Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins
had made her truly his bride? “Quite so. But there was a difficulty,
friend John. If so that, then what about the others? Ho, ho! Then
this sweet maid is a polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead

15

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.174

25
to me, but alive by Church’s law, though no wits, all gone--even I,
who am faithful this now-no-wife a, “bigamist.”16
The conversation between the two men seems out of place after what has just occurred.
Van Helsing’s claims of Lucy’s polygamist ways, even jokingly, are scandalous. In a
period of time where sexual scandals were widespread and negative despite Victorian
England’s societal changes, especially for women. Van Helsing makes a clear separation
between the constitution of marriage in regards to the law and the Lord. Technically, Van
Helsing isn’t engaging in an act of bigotry according to the state, but if he were wouldn’t
Lucy have committed the act twice over? This would also be less impactful on his part
because he is man and also has a deceased wife. Lucy is metaphorically a succubus,
stealing away men’s hearts and blood. Her mere existence taints her innocence that does
not protect her from the reader’s prior knowledge of her desire to engage in polygamy.
This quote suggests more lewdness to Lucy’s character, which fails to capture her
overwhelming desire. Moreover, what comes from this is her second death at the hands of
the men that once loved her and by blood filled the role of husband. Once again, there is a
parallel to Lucy and Dracula; the marriages of two are polygamist and both are wedded
by blood, which seems sacrilegious.
Lucy and Dracula are closely tied together, even more so when she transforms
into a vampire. The vampiric Lucy is a mere deconstruction of domesticity, innocence,
purity and motherhood. At each moment, Lucy portrays something vehement in nature
and in opposition to the image of the idealistic women. She occupies the role of a
traditional, pure and sweet woman; before her transformation, Lucy lacked autonomy and
16

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.186

26
often listened to what the male figures in her life told her to do. Her pure, angelic nature
is soon twisted, as she becomes more of an angel of death that lures innocent children
away from their homes. This vampiric Lucy not only disturbs the homes of other women
by luring their children away, but she also distorts the idea of maternity. In her new form
she is able to enchant those around her as she attempts to lure them. Her power consists
of her ability in mimicry and manipulation. This mimicry that Lucy performs is not
limited to just her maternity, but her domestic role as well.
The hypersexualization of Victorian women, according to Lesley A. Hall, existed
mainly for those of lower class; the upper class women were pure, innocent, maternal
angel-like creatures that exist within the domestic sphere.17 The body of a pure woman
was not sexualized because it occupied the space of maternity and natural womanhood.
This natural womanhood is what Lucy is evidently going against in her vampiric nature.
When the men begin to pursue Lucy, she is caught drinking the blood of a small child.
Upon spotting them, Lucy attempts to lure Arthur to her side.
“She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous
grace, said-- “Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to
me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can rest together.
Come, my husband, come! “There was something diabolically
sweet in her tones--something of the tinkling of glass when struck-which rang through the brains even of us who heard the words
addressed to another. As for Arthur he seemed under a spell;
moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms.”18
Lucy’s performance, similar to her voice, rings of falsity. Both the vampiric Lucy and
innocent Lucy have the ability to lure these men; the difference in this situation is that the
17

Hall, Lesley A. Sex, Gender, and Social Change in Britain since 1880. New York: St. Martin's,
2000. Print.
18
Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.219

27
vampiric Lucy has the intent to harm them. Arthur is lured into her “diabolically sweet”
tone of voice as if he was under a spell and this is due to Lucy’s ability to imitate
womanhood. She welcomes him to her as if they were indeed husband and wife, which is
why the other men are able to hear the falsetto nature of her voice. However, her act is
fraudulent and fiendish in its intention. The traditional image of femininity is marred with
seduction, desire and the unnatural. Stoker illustrates the unnaturalness of femininity and
domesticity that women practice. Through the act of adhering to societal constructs of
social norms, women are inevitably portraying a false construct of femininity. Lucy’s
sexual inner self does not resemble the innocent and pure nature that she projects
outward. The “fallen woman” may not exist in this situation, but traditional women, like
Lucy, stand in stark contrast to the women’s sphere, which functions outside of the home.
In this world, the world of Stoker, innocent and meek maidens fall prey to the faced
paced, advancing world that is forming around them. Lucy’s “voluptuousness” heightens
the mockery of her own aforementioned sweet purity, which is tamed by the same men
that once nurtured her innocent behavior.
In contrast to the radical role of Lucy, Stoker constructs his idealistic
representation of womanhood through Mina. Mina is the wife of Jonathan Harker, yet she
goes beyond that identification due to her major role in the novel. We first hear of Mina
within the first few pages as Jonathan makes a note of giving her new recipes to try. In
this instance, we realize how important she is to Jonathan’s character as well as her
ability to fill the domestic role. Despite having domestic roles assigned to her character
she is quite practical as well. Mina serves as a figure of the traditional role of a Victorian

28
woman as she stands in opposition of the New Woman, a group of women briefly
mentioned throughout the novel. The New Woman was a feminist ideal that emerged
during the 19th century, which pushed the boundaries of the male dominated society.
Mina exists outside this realm of a radical feminist woman and instead serves as a tool for
the men in the novel. An article by Carol Senf suggests that, “These few quotations from
New Women fiction indicate that, while Mina’s statement on the New Women writers
tends to lump them all together, third group does not present a consistent view of
women…portray the New Woman’s as dangerous limitations of self-delusion.”19 Mina
serves as a medium in which Stoker critiques the concept of New Woman. She serves as
a tool that can be translated into— someone that is of use because of their function and
malleability.
In any case, Mina’s ability to write in shorthand makes her a valuable piece in
pursuing Dracula as well as a form of record keeping. Mina’s writing places her in a
position of power that is quite different from Lucy’s own enchantment. Mina’s voice is
the root of her power; she is able to record her observations as well as everyone else’s.
She has the permanence of pen and paper while Lucy relies on her body and seduction.
However, Mina’s existence is intertwined with the domestic sphere; she has the ability to
help the men in their business while performing acts of domesticity. These duties within
the domestic sphere coincide with that of the professional field, which is similar to the
women’s sphere, which is a woman’s ability to function in the real world with a certain
practicality. Mina’s professionalism and domesticity serve in a form of dualism; which
19

Senf, Carol A.. 1982. “"Dracula": Stoker's Response to the New Woman”. Victorian Studies 26
(1). Indiana University Press: 33–49. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3827492.

29
her working skills and femininity are not only useful, but important in advancing the
characters. Mina states that her sole reason for gathering these sets of skills was due to
her longing to be of use to Jonathan once they were married; she would be able to
transcend the domestic sphere and enter the professional sphere beside her husband. The
social status for Victorian women allowed them the rare opportunity to work outside the
home and make money in order to support themselves. However, Mina is able to use her
skills to not support herself, but to instead offer assistance to her husband.
Mina’s value as a member of the group is based on her usefulness to the group’s
endeavors. This validates Mina’s diligent work and carefulness when writing in her diary,
which she uses a way to practice her shorthand and typewriting skills in order to be more
useful to her husband. She also tells Van Helsing that she learns the train timetable by
heart so that she may help Jonathan in case he is in a hurry. Her professional skills can be
of use without her posing a threat to the patriarchal power because Mina still exists
within the home.
Mina embodies several standards and values placed on her, the first being her
cleverness and knowledge. Her cleverness is first noted aloud by Van Helsing when Mina
presents him with a typed version of Jonathan’s notes.
“Oh, you so clever woman! he said. ‘I have long knew that Mr. Jonathan
was a man of much thankfulness; but see his wife have all the good
things’… ‘Alas! I know not the shorthand.’ ‘By this time my little joke
was over, and I was almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copy from
my workbasket and handed it to him.’ ‘Forgive me, I said: ‘I could not
help it...I have written it out on the typewriter for you. He too it, and his
eyes glistened.’ ‘You are so good, he said.’ ‘And may I read it now? I may
want to ask you some things when I have read.’ ‘By all means,’ I said,
‘read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you can ask me questions whist

30
we eat’….When I came back I found him walking hurriedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with excitement.”20
Mina’s role is more than just providing her husband and having a set of
professional skills. Mina serves almost as a governess, who often scolds and naughty
child, as she upholds standards of social norms and often chastises Lucy for not doing the
same. Mina is driven by her duty, which is a strong righteousness that is encompassed in
her lady-like duties. Mina enforces correct behavior during a scene in which she recovers
Lucy after she wanders out into the streets due to her sleepwalking. Mina makes an effort
to not only bring Lucy home, but also ensure that they are following all forms of
propriety.
“She trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once
with me home she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. As
we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to the pathway outside the Churchyard, where
there was a puddle of water remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet
with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.”21
Within a few lines Mina manages to demonstrate the importance of maintaining a good
name and prevent them from being caught doing something that may seem scandalous.
Stoker portrays Lucy as nothing more than fearful child who is protected by a powerful
maternal figure. This behavioral correction of Lucy that is subtlety placed in scenes of
interaction between them. Upon finding Lucy, Mina fastens Lucy’s nightdress closed.
This image evokes the unconcerned nature of Lucy of her public image and Mina’s

20
21

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.193
Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.11

31
attempts at correcting the behavior. The daubing of mud onto her own feet is simply
demonstrating her tactfulness and her ability to adhere to societal critique.
In the case of social critique, both Lucy and Mina exist in a time period of great
change for women. The New Woman were a generation of women at the end of the
nineteenth century who believed in the Suffrage movement, education for women, and
doing away with the sexual double standards. The New Woman was regularly the subject
for unconventional, supposedly unfeminine behavior.22 In Dracula, Mina uses the term
“New Woman” in a joking manner and in the context of proper behavior. The “New
Woman” is in reference point to comment on her and Lucy’s appetite. “I believe we have
shocked the “New Woman” with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them!”23
Mina doesn’t consider herself a New Woman, but instead insults them by stating that
men are more tolerant. This remark from Mina hints at an anxiety that Stoker is
transferring into his text; the growing power of women was not always positive and this
can be seen through his social critique through the use of Mina.
Unlike Lucy, Mina resembles an upper class Victorian woman; Mina is stripped away of
any sexual desire or want. Her only desire is the advancement of Jonathan’s career and
her own domestic duty. Her maternal instinct establishes her as an emotional safe haven
and a source of faith for the men; she possesses the power to be loved by her male
counterparts through her wisdom and maternity.
“I suppose there is something in a woman’s nature that makes a
man free to break down before her and express his feelings on the

22
23

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.108
Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.108

32
tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his
manhood…”24
Stoker plays with the idea of masculinity and femininity in relation to gentlemen and
proper ladies. Mina’s maternal nature makes it easier for men to expose themselves to
her; she exists more as a mother than a lover in the text. Mina is the embodiment of a
domestic space; she represents the secure home that Victorian men expect to receive from
their wives. Stoker transcribes several other characteristics to Mina as she becomes the
idealistic Victorian woman archetype. These qualities consist of her chastity and
modesty. Contrary to Lucy with her polygamous tendencies (i.e. desiring to marry three
men), Mina is decidedly innocent and morally adequate.
Despite, Stoker portraying Mina as a strong female character, there is a repeating
pattern of victimized female characters in Dracula as well as the need for heroic
gentlemen. Mina’s victimization takes place within her bedroom as Dracula threatens to
kill Jonathan if she alerted the other men of his presence. The scene that Stoker illustrates
is very dark and forceful; the descriptions sound as if Dracula were raping Mina in the
presence of her husband.
“...with his left hand he held both Mrs. Mina’s hands, keeping them away
with her arms at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the
neck, forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was
smeared with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man’s bare breast
which was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two had a
terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten’s nose into a saucer of milk
to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his face,
and the hellish look that I had heard described seem to leap into it. His
eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils of the white

24

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.235

33
aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the white sharp
teeth, behind the full lips of the blood dripping mouth…”25
The scene that takes place in this quote is the inevitable violence that befalls Mina at the
hands of Count Dracula. Stoker demonstrates that innocent women with a pure heart and
a man’s brain can fall prey to Dracula’s forceful nature. The only way to stop this vicious
cycle is by the men transitioning into the role of the hero and vampire hunter. In order to
stop this insatiable beast, they must kill Dracula like the beast he is and save the women
that are unable to defend themselves. The Count’s forceful handling of Mina as she
drinks from his bosom is parallel to the law on rape during the Victorian Era; rape was
described more or less as one's inability to resist from terror, or from an overpowering
force of a ravisher against a respectable woman.26 This description of Dracula not only
shows that there is an imminent threat against society, but the violence women will suffer
at the hands of a “criminal.” The mark left on Mina is a testimony of the violence and the
misogynistic world that she is forced to exist within.
Stoker’s anxieties manifest in his novel, Dracula. Stoker was unable to separate
himself from the advancing world around him as the vampire’s illustrate various critiques
that Stoker has on the world around him. During the time Dracula was written, America
was growing as a superpower nation, women were gaining more power inside and outside
of the home, and technological advances were taking place. Vampires are representative
of these various changes and several roles were devised in the narrative to help address
each of these issues. Dracula presents the reader with a misogynistic world in which

25
26

Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: pg.283
Hall, Lesley pg. 17

34
masculinity is at stake when the vampires amplify what Stoker believes to be the
insatiable desire of women; women like Mina are able to be maternal figures and helpful
to their husbands. They are not supposed to be similar to Dracula’s wives/ mistresses or
Lucy Westenra, who exhibits an excessive amount of sexuality. Stoker depicts
womanhood as something that is fragile and needs to be cared for by both the wife and
husband. It is a man’s duty towards those whom they love to protect them against the
forces of evil.
It seems that Stoker appears to loath women's sensuality and sexuality: Lucy’s
desires results in her death and she is unable to achieve marriage or motherhood in what
would be the proper fashion and not by blood rites. Positive depictions of women are
limited in this novel in contrast to the group of male heroes, including Mr. Morris, the
American man that sacrificed himself to defeat Dracula while the rest were rewarded
with a life of happiness. What’s an interesting observation in the novel is that vampirism
is primarily a main threat to women, who become hypersexualized creatures. In the
vampire coven, Dracula is the only male vampire and the only ones in danger of
becoming vampires in the text are both Lucy and Mina, who are both female characters.
The men do not have any weaknesses; the only exception is in regards to falling prey to
womanhood and voluptuous women. Men to show their weaknesses because there is
something alluring and welcoming in a woman’s nature, but this can be a negative aspect
if the woman is a vampire or sexual. However, there is an insidious part to the anxieties
that manifest in this text and it mainly comes from Stoker's female characters, who fall
prey to internalized misogyny. Stoker’s compliments promote internalized misogyny by

35
presenting these self-loathing women, whom he regards as "noble" or with a “man’s
brain.” A woman’s value is dependent on her contribution to the men around her.
Comments that are supposed to be positive are nothing more than backhanded praise on a
woman’s ability to be clever, which is stressed to be a man’s trait. With a violent threat
such as Dracula, the men must transform themselves into the role of the hero, one who
has a strong sense of masculinity. The hero transcends bestial vampires and women with
a “man’s brain.”
Dracula is one of first vampire novels and its influence on other vampire
narratives still exists today. Other gothic literature contemporary novels show a wide
array of vampires and different depictions of vampirism. Each of these stories constructs
a unique origin story for the vampires in the text. Not every vampire poses a threat to
society like Stoker’s Dracula, each come with their own set of anxieties that are tangibles
in relation to the supernatural being. Sometimes, vampires are the protagonist and the
reader is able to see another perspective, another lens that is through the red eyes of the
vampire in question. Furthermore, in tracing the timeline of these vampire novels and by
cross-examining the novels with historical evidence one can illustrate the complexities of
the vampire. Literature and history cannot be entirely separated from one another;
chapters two and three will explore how different vampire narratives follow suite in
which vampires manifest from societal anxieties that are repressed and rejected outside of
the literary narrative.

36
Chapter 2- Anne Rice’s Sexual Revolution of the Vampire
In Stoker’s novel Dracula, a new creature, the vampire was born. The vampire
represented a period of sexual anxiety during 19th century Victorian England. This
anxiety contributed to the birth of Dracula. This was a novel written by Bram Stoker,
which revealed his own displacement and discomfort; the vampire was used to represent
the rapid change that took place during a period of social and political change. Through
Victorian society and Stoker’s own anxiety, Count Dracula was born. This change
evoked Stoker’s own anxiety that then seeped out into his fictional world. A world in
which Stoker creates a fiendish villain, the vampire, that exists within a dangerously
changing world, however through technology and the reason of man, this supernatural
world can be conquered and contained. In this narrative, man conquers the fiendish
vampire figure and becomes the savior of women’s virtue. In Stoker’s world, which is
cloaked in the existence of the “other” or fiendish villain, from the depths of hell exists
man. Man conquers both nature and whatever threatens to shake its solid boundaries.
Through Stoker’s construction of boundaries the vampire is born; the vampire is a
creature that manifests as a multitude of anxieties, but in the end they are inevitable
conquered. If the vampire is a stand in for Stoker’s own anxieties, what happens when his
anxieties are absent from other vampire narrative? What does the vampire then represent?
Dracula continues to be a widely recognizable character in modern society.
Stoker’s novel has sparked several renditions and film adaptations of the popular novel.
Because of this, Dracula’s popularity has continued to grow with the help of visual
representations of the vampire, which further ingrains the idea that Dracula is the first

37
vampire. In each of these creations of Dracula, the meaning shifts further away from
Stoker’s original creation. With each re-creation of Dracula the characters change and
even the rules of vampirism. For example, in Tod Browning’s version of Dracula
(1931)27, though it had some semblance of Stoker’s Dracula, several changes were made
to the main plot.
The change in narrative and overall plot of Browning’s Dracula (1931), creates a
new Dracula and vampire tale, one that moves away from the advancing Victorian
England. In the movie, a young Renfield traverses the mountains; this change in character
shifts and eliminates the majority of Stoker’s own plot and use of the vampire. Jonathan
never encounters the three seductresses so the anxiety surrounding overly sexualized
females is lost. The anxiety Stoker has with the “New Woman” is completely absent in
this film; Lucy soon becomes known as just “the woman in white.” She is nothing more
than Dracula’s next victim in the movie and so the internal struggles leading up to that
moment is lost. Lucy no longer falls prey to a lecherous life and so there is no meaning
behind her death. The lecherous life of Lucy and the sexualization of feminine sexual
nature is unfortunately lost in the movie as she and Mina simply revert back to the
helpless female caricature, which are female characters that are easily interchangeable.
We learn through Browning’s usage of Dracula that the vampire is a blank slate, a
Lockean “tabula rasa” in which the author writes their anxieties and fears that manifest as
the vampire.

27

Drácula. Directed by Tod Browning. Performed by Bela Lugosi. United States: Universal
Pictures Corp., 1931.

38
So though Browning’s film adaptation of Dracula drops some of the key
components of the original, there is one consistency in both. In Stoker’s Dracula and
Browning’s Dracula, the “otherness” of the vampire is a recurring theme. The overall
“otherness” of Dracula is captured as he comes from the mountainous Eastern Europe, a
decrepit castle and in the movie has a heavily accented voice. Tod Browning cast Bela
Lugosi as Dracula, a six foot one Hungarian actor with a heavy accent to match. If
anything, his heavy accent has made him the foreign “other.” In the book, Jonathan
remarked how well the Count spoke English, as if he were a natural born Englishman.
This is not the same for Lugosi, who in fact speaks English poorly and learns his lines
phonetically. Both his speech pattern and heavily accented voice separates him from the
perfect English speaking characters in the movie.

28

(Bela Lugosi as Count Dracula) fig.2

The world that the screenwriter and director chose to create surrounding Stoker’s
narrative, captures the atmospheric beginning in Castle Dracula, however Lugosi creates
a fiercely romantic Count Dracula instead of the cunning phantom of the night. With

28

https://www.google.com/search?q=dracula+bela+lugosi

39
Renfield taking Jonathan’s role in the beginning of the narrative, the hardships,
temptations and fears that mold the original Dracula are lost. Unfortunately, the movie
degenerates into the stage play after the first twenty minutes and the Count Dracula that
we once knew and loved is lost in generalization of the vampire. Even Dracula’s final
staking is anticlimactic; this truly was a plot of rescuing the maiden, killing the monster
and becoming a hero in the end. Also, despite the major time difference between the
novel and movie, the “otherness” of Dracula was kept in the narrative and even increased
by their choice in casting. By observing it like Stoker’s narrative, what were some of the
anxieties hidden away in this film?
First, we must remember that Tod Browning was American filmmaker. The
remaking of of the vampire narrative removes Victorian England from the narrative of
Dracula, instead Dracula exists within an American context. By Americanizing Dracula,
the overall themes and symbolism behind this character shifts as well. Instead of vampire
who poses a threat to civil Victorian England, with his immoral coven of lecherous
women, the “Americanized” Dracula simply poses a threat to innocent individuals who
are victimized by his fiendish nature. His fiendish nature then places him within the
category of villain who must be stopped by a hero. Looking at the historical context
around the time this film was created; a major event that took place in American history
was The Great Depression. The Great Depression began around 1929 and lasted until
about 1939. Laemmle’s film was released in 1931, which is earlier on in The Great
Depression, however this was during a time of increasing immigration, especially from
Northern and Western Europe, so Lugosi’s Hungarian background is similar to Dracula’s

40
own Eastern Europe origins, which places them at the cusp of “otherness.” The film is the
literal staking of Eastern Europe immigration and the triumph of Americanism.
The world of Dracula, as demonstrated by the several film adaptations, can easily
be manipulated and transformed. Browning’s film shows the ways in which we can take
the vampire lore and construct it into something completely different from Stoker’s
original plot. Now that the vampire has transitioned into America, it takes on a new set
of anxieties that exist within the new landscape. Anne Rice, a New Orleans author, has
taken the world of the vampires in a new direction; she draws on the vampire's
introduction to American society. The vampires that Anne Rice creates deviate from
Stoker’s Victorian origin of Dracula. Along with Anne Rice’s other books in the
Vampire Chronicles series, The Vampire Lestat, is an anti-Dracula novel. Lestat exists in
a world where, “everybody was sick of Count Dracula.”29 The novel acknowledges the
power and origin of the vampire narrative, but Rice does everything in her power to
deconstruct this narrative and this is done through her vampire characters, namely Lestat
de Lioncourt.
The novels Interview with The Vampire and The Vampire Lestat are key
narratives in the vampire…. In Interview with The Vampire Louis Pointe Du Lac gives
has an interview with a journalist that he meets at a bar. The Vampire Lestat is the
autobiography of Lestat de Lioncourt, who is the creator of Louis. After he reads
Interview with The Vampire, he feels compelled to counter Louis’s interview and
document his own life in hopes of drawing Louis out. During this time, Lestat indulges in

29

Rice, Anne. The Vampire Lestat. New York: Knopf, 1985. (p.13)

41
the 80’s culture and becomes a rock icon as he is the rebellious “brat prince”. In reading
both of the narratives, it is safe to take a precautionary approach to each because it is
unclear on who is telling the truth.
Lestat de Lioncourt was born on November 7, 1760, as the seventh son of the
marquis d'Auvergne in the Auvergne region of France. He is the youngest of the three
that survived to adulthood. Though the de Lioncourt’s are aristocrats, the family lives in
poverty and Augustin, the eldest brother, immediately spent the small dowry his wife
provided. The de Lioncourt’s live a life of relative poverty in their decrepit castle.
Lestat's mother, Gabrielle, is the only literate member of the family. Lestat both loves and
resents her because she can easily immerse herself in a novel and ignore the family and
escape. Lestat's unnamed father is blind and spends his days playing chess.30 Rice makes
a point in creating vampires with backgrounds; Lestat comes from France and has a
human family. He did not simply rise from the ground one day and claim to be of the
devil or from hell. By constructing a family unit background for her vampires, Rice
complicates the origin story of the vampire; Lestat is not simply a vampire. He was once
a human that existed and a Christian as well.
Stoker’s sets boundaries for the vampire are broken. The rules in Dracula are
extensive— from garlic, sunlight, religious symbols and figures— many things can
restrict the vampire’s mobility in the narrative. The vampires in Rice’s narrative are not
constrained by these things that are supposed to ward of evil and summon the wrath of
God on unholy beings. In Rice’s Interview with The Vampire, which predates The

30

Rice, Anne. The Vampire Lestat. New York: Knopf, 1985. (p.23)

42
Vampire Lestat, a journalist is as the title suggests, interviewing Louis. Louis de Pointe
du Lac is Lestat’s third fledgling and during his interview he describes his life past
human life and vampire life with the unnamed journalist. When Louis reflects on his
transformation into a vampire, Louis mentions that during a confrontation between Lestat
and his father, Lestat’s father asks for his rosary. The journalist then asks about the other
myths about vampires, which separates Rice’s vampires from Stokers.
“I was going to ask, rosaries have crosses on them, don’t they?’ “Oh the
rumor about crosses!’ The vampire laughed. “You refer to our being afraid
of crosses?’ “Unable to look at them, I thought,” said the boy. “Nonsense,
my friend, sheer nonsense. I can look at anything I like... “And what about
the rumor about keyholes? That you can...become steam and go through
them.’ “I wish I could,” laughed the vampire.’ “How positively
delightful….”That is, how would you say today… bullshit?’ “The boy
laughed despite himself. Then his face grew serious.’ “You mustn't be so
shy with me,’ the vampire said. “What is it?’ “The story about the stakes
through the heart,” said the boy, his cheeks coloring slightly. “The same,’
said the vampire, “Bull-shit,’ he said, carefully articulating both syllables,
so that the boy smiled. “No magical power whatsoever.”31
The dialogue between Louis and the journalist references to the myths Stoker creates in
Dracula. Dracula is a character that can become mist, transform, has incredible speed and
power yet can is defeated by a stake through the heart and religious objects and symbols.
There are other moments in the text when Rice rejects Stoker’s narrative, but in this
instance the vampire myths that the journalist’s asks is laughable. Every myth is broken,
except their vulnerability to daylight, which Rice works around in her later additions to
the Vampire Chronicles series. The purpose in the inclusion of this dialogue between the
two is to bring the vampiric nature into dialogue and then disengage from Stoker’s
rendition completely. Simply, dashing Stoker’s myths in this narrative is not enough to
31

Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. (p.23-24)

43
distance the vampires in Rice’s narrative from his own. Rice recreates the vampire with
several characteristics, from their looks to their internal struggle as existing as both
vampire and human. However, Rice redefines the vampire within her narrative; Dracula
is not only separated from her own vampires in her narrative, Dracula is dead.
Anne Rice’s vampires are not simply putting an end to the Dracula myth; her
vampires are reinventing the vampire narrative. The complexity of Rice’s characters
stems from firstly, their past lives. The lives that these vampires once led are revealed in
the narrative. Rice is careful in placing these characters in backgrounds that are heavily
bound to family. Each of their backgrounds helps understand the complexity of the
distinct vampire personalities. Secondly, morality or the difference between right and
wrong is a common theme. The morality of Rice’s vampires further complicates them; if
they dwell on their actions it portrays them as more than just bloodthirsty creatures.
Thirdly, there is complexity between being human or vampire in which the two are not
mutually exclusive. Throughout both narratives there are moments when the vampires
reflect on their past human lives as well as their current situation as immortal being. At
one point Louis thinks, “Could I not return? Could I not be human again?”32 As Louis
reflects on these questions he knows the unbearable truth that this is indeed impossible.
The vampires in this narrative deeply feel, there is remorse in their actions, love, anger
and jealousy. They exist as both vampire and human, neither one nor the other.
Lestat and the other vampires have both their vampire nature and humanity that is
never separate from one another; their existence is a duality or perhaps a collective

32

Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. (p. 87)

44
identity. This collective identity, of these beings, makes them both human and vampire.
This collective identity is what Dracula never possessed. Rice’s vampires maintain their
humanity; both their humanity and vampireness become key characteristics and follows
these vampires throughout their existence. This concept is reiterated in the text itself, this
moment occurs after Lestat comes back from killing the wolves that plagued his town
during his human youth. At the ripe age of 21, Lestat ventures into the woods with his
dogs, horse and weapons. The wolves are slain, but at the cost of his dogs and horse,
whom he had to put to rest. Since Lestat refuses to leave his room nor wash the blood
from his clothing for several days his mother decides to visit and leave him with a few
encouraging words. Her words to him were, “But you’re many things,’ she said. “Not
only one thing. You’re the killer and the man.”33 The words spoken to him by his mother
allude to the very nature of vampires; they are both man (woman) and the killer as well. It
is up to each individual vampire on how much he or she chooses to show or engage in.
It is simple to leave Rice’s vampires are simply that— the complete opposition to
Stoker’s vampire narrative, Dracula. First, these vampires are not so different from
humans themselves; in fact they operate under the guise of a normal human family unit.
Due to Louis’s lack of control, he attacks a young girl who is sickly and stands beside her
dead mother. Lestat later pays for her to leave the shelter/hospital that she was recovering
at and decides to turn her into a vampire as well. Louis and Lestat have successfully
gained their “adopted child” Claudia. Second, Rice changes the landscape by destroying

33

Rice, Anne. The Vampire Lestat. New York: Knopf, 1985. (p.38)

45
the Eastern Europe origin that Stoker has put in place. Claudia and Louis, flee to Eastern
Europe after Claudia’s attempts at killing Lestat have failed. They venture to Eastern

Figure 3 (Claudia, Louis and Lestat) 34

Europe in hopes of finding more vampires. Louis tells the journalist that Claudia had a
strong desire to find other vampires in the world; she would not accept that Louis, Lestat
and herself were the only vampires in existence. During this journey of redefining the
vampire narrative, Rice’s characters travel to Eastern Europe and there they experience
two key moments. The first moment is when Claudia and Louis arrive in Eastern Europe
where they encounter several “creatures” in that landscape. Louis describes the encounter
to the journalist:
“A mindless corpse?’ The boy asked. “Always,’ said the vampire. “When
we found these creatures at all. I remember a handful at most. Sometimes
we only watched them from a distance all too familiar with their wagging
bovine heads, their haggard shoulders, their rotted, ragged clothing….”But
what were these creatures?’ Why were they like this?’ asked the boy, his
lips grimacing with disgust. “I don’t understand. How could they be so
different from you and Claudia, yet exist? “I had my theories. So did

34

https://www.google.com/search?q=lestat+and+louis

46
Claudia. But the main thing which I had then was despair...fear that we
had killed the only other vampire like us, Lestat.”35
The key phrase in this passage is “mindless corpse”. Louis does not deny that these
creatures are vampires, but they are nothing like him or Claudia. Even the
characterizations of the vampires are implying that they are more like “creatures.”
However, how are these creatures different from Claudia and Louis if their existence is
the same? The creatures are “rotted” and “ragged,” a decaying and deathly existence, in
opposition to Louis and Claudia’s thriving lives. Furthermore, the creature’s eyes are
vacant, they are nothing more than empty husks. What is interesting about the existence
and placement of these creatures is that they exist within the boundaries of Eastern
Europe, the origin of Dracula. In this geographical location, nothing but death, decay and
“mindless creatures exist there.” As Louis states, “We had met the European vampire, the
creature of the Old World. He was dead.”36 Dracula is dead. The original landscape of
vampires is dead and has moved elsewhere. The new motherland is New Orleans; a place
where the vampire can be itself and not lurk around graveyards or decrepit castles.
Though Louis does not explicitly state it, there is some form of balance and status
in being vampires like Claudia, Louis and Claudia. Vampires like them are able to enjoy
the finer things in life and maintain their sanity. These vampires participate in society and
though they are the “other” it is simply by their nature and not their actions. These
vampires exist in America and therefore the rules of vampirism are different. Whereas
Stoker’s Count Dracula was vengeful, Rice’s vampires are indulgent. They wouldn’t be
35
36

Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. p.195-196
Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. p. 190-191

47
caught dead (no pun intended) in a cavern or deprecated castle. The vampires in Rice’s
narrative live lavish lifestyles and spend the fortune that is readily available to them. For
example, Lestat’s music career is a prime example. As Lestat states, “Old rules didn’t
matter to me now, either.”37 In this instance Lestat, pulls away from the restrictions that
bind him within the text.
In the sacred rules of the vampires, the transformation of a human into a vampire
is known as the “Dark Gift.” It’s dark in its very nature of ending the life of others in
order to live, yet a gift in the vampire’s ability to pass on vampires and humans to receive
the gift. The ritual itself, is seductive, Louis recalls the moment in his interview,
“Listen, keep your eyes wide,’ Lestat whispered to me, his
lips moving against my neck. I remember that the
movement of his lips raised the hair all over my body, sent
a shock of sensation through my body that was unlike the
pleasure of passion…”38
This moment is so pronounce in Rice’s work, her vampires border on the line of
eroticism as they delve into what is clearly seen as a connection between maker and
fledgling. The transformation is one of deep passion and sensuality. The scene between
Lestat and Louis is one homoeroticism and the erasure of boundaries. In both of Rice’s
works, many of the vampires seek solace in the vampires around them, gender nor age
matters. When Louis stumbles across Claudia, Lestat encourages Louis to bite her, “Take
her, Louis, I know you want her. And I [he] did.”39 The scene is hypersexualized as they
focus on the roundness of her face, the golden curls or even the plump and sweetness of

37

Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. p.16
Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. p.19
39
Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1976. p.91
38

48
her body. The language used is parallel to the way Stoker describes the three seductresses
hidden away in Count Dracula’s Castle. However, Rice’s vampires are eager to sink their
teeth in what may be considered forbidden in order to indulge in the essence of their
vampire nature.
Though the vampire moves away from the Dracula narrative, Interview with The
Vampire and The Vampire Lestat are more than just anti- Dracula vampires. The
reappearance of vampires during the 70’s and 80’s is representative of something that has
appeared alongside Rice’s narrative. In Stoker’s narrative the vampires became a
projection of Stoker’s own anxieties over the changing times of Victorian England, so
now we must determine why the vampire has made a return in 20th century North
America. In an article titled, “The Dark Gift: Vampires in the AIDS Era” the author
argues that the reappearance of vampires is due to the sudden appearance of AIDS during
the 1980’s. This unknown ailment is a possible causation for the growing popularity of
vampires during this time period. Yurguis asks,
“Is there a parallel between the passionate, asexual, and immortal
creatures we meet in Rice’s novels and fantasies of people in the
AIDS era, an era when fear of possible infection restrains human
interaction, and concepts such as sex and blood have become
synonymous with death?”40
Yurguis makes an interesting statement; she mentions that Rice’s vampires are “asexual”
while others believe them to be “bi-sexual”. Though the vampires do not engage in what
we would consider to be sexual acts, the desire and passion between these individuals is
hard to discount and Rice may indeed categorize them as bi-sexual. However, this is only
40

Yurguis, Katia. ""The Dark Gift: Vampires in the AIDS Era"" Accessed April 22, 2016.
http://www.arts.cornell.edu/knight_institute/publicationsprizes/discoveries/discoveriesfall2002/01k
atiayurguis.pdf.

49
a slight opposition in terms of the overall concept that she argues; what stands out is that
“infection restrains human interaction” and “sex and blood have become synonymous”.
This indicates that the vampires have a push and pull effect in which they become the
sexualized and desired individual, but the blood that they contain is “deadly.”
Yurguis parallels the reappearance of vampires with the appearance of the
Autoimmune Disease (AIDS) in the United States. The first case was first reported in the
United States around 1981, and these cases were most common among homosexual men.
The main argument in Yarguis’s article is that these vampire figures are representative of
those infected with the virus because vampires are ostracized and socially rejected,
similarly to those infected with the disease during that time. Both groups are excluded
from the mass public and seen as the “other.” This is of course, is in connection with the
eroticism and sexualization of both groups. The vampire is a projection of the current
state of these individuals, which Yurguis believes to be a “symbolic death.” where Rice’s
vampires are able to participate in during their current state. She quotes Dresser who
claims “that sexuality and especially one that differs from the norm like ‘oral,
necorphilic, incestual, homosexual’ can be experienced through the figure of
revenants.”41 Vampires are able to engage in a safe sphere of desire and lust because they
are nearly invulnerable, with the exceptions of the sun and fire. However, what is seen as
deadly becomes something eternal and erotic. Lestat exists in a time that is not infected
by the disease; instead it is lush, colorful and inviting.

41

Nussbaumer, Janina. The Vampire in Literature: A Comparison of Bram Stoker's Dracula and
Anne Rice's Interview with the Vampire. Hamburg: Anchor Academic Pub., 2014. Accessed April
6, 2016.

50
“People were adventurous and exotic again the way they’d been in
the old days, before the great middle-class revolutions of the late
1700’s. They looked the way they had in those times...as far as
sexuality, it was no longer a matter of superstition and fear.”42
Lestat participates in a sexual promiscuity that is not limited by the threat of AIDS, which
was thought to only exist among the gay community during the outbreak in the United
States. In lieu of this idea, the sexuality of Rice’s vampires is ambiguous. At times they
seem to desire vampires of the same sex or something that is forbidden in society. At
times there is no clear separation of sex nor age when the vampire takes interest, it is
simply an indulgence in the physicality and orgasmic nature of the “Dark Gift.” Anne
Rice’s vampires are at times bi-sexual, and others almost incestuous. There are no
boundaries between age nor sex. Rice makes this clear by the relationships that the main
vampire characters have with one another. Louis both loves and hates Lestat; the same
relationship is in place with Armand after he kills Claudia. Claudia is the “daughter” of
Louis and Lestat, but Louis describes her in a more erotic and sexualized way. They often
kiss each other’s mouths or cheeks. Finally, the relationship between Lestat has with both
Nicki (Nicolas de Lenfent) and Louis is one of love as both are turned into his fledglings.
However, the relationship he has with his mother is more complex. He both loves and
hates her as well, but when he transforms her back in Paris, he wishes to “ravish” her.
Referring back to Dressers quote, the forbidden nature of certain sexual tastes, such as
homoeroticism and incest, is heightened when vampires are present. They are erasures to
social boundaries that the once strictly enforced social order to disrupt. Everything seems
plausible or acceptable when one is undead.
42

Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1993. p.7-9

51
Going back to Yurguis’s question, “Is there a parallel between the passionate,
asexual, and immortal creatures we meet in Rice’s novels and fantasies of people in the
AIDS era, an era when fear of possible infection restrains human interaction, and
concepts such as sex and blood have become synonymous with death?”43 Instead of
death, the question that should be posed is whether; the act of giving one the “Dark Gift”
is synonymous with sex and desire?
In order to answer any of the questions posed, it is beneficial to observe how the
vampires in the text engage in the act of feeding or the transformation of humans into
vampires. The first example is the scene when Louis feeds from a human for the first
time. Though many of the scenes or descriptions that Rice gives use are laden with
passionate language, this scene is important nonetheless because it is the feeling Louis
has from his first kill which is described from the perspective of the vampire. We are
unable to have this point of view from Dracula, so Rice is the first to shed light on the
feelings vampires receive from the act of feeding.
“...Once the wound was made, the blood flowed. And once that
happened, once I was locked to it, drinking… all else vanished…
the sucking mesmerized me; the warm struggling of the man was
soothing to the tension of my hands… the drumbeat of his heart—
only this time it beat in perfect rhythm of my own heart, the two
resounding in every fiber of my being until the beat began to grow
slower… I was drowsing, falling into weightlessness…”44
The mood and tone within the scene that Rice constructs is very passionate. The act of
sucking blood for vampires is an intimate act, as the scene suggests there is a connection

43
44

Yurguis, Katia. ""The Dark Gift"" Accessed April 22, 2016.
Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1976. p.30

52
between the victim— in that moment they become one. This may be parallel to the act of
love making which engages two partners in an act of intense physical contact. Also, this
passionate moment that he has for the first time is with a man. An act so intimate, an
embrace so passionate is between the vampire and man, both of which are male. In his act
of passion, the world around him is lost as he indulges in the moment and body of his
victim. These moments are numerous in the novel and are contingent in Lestat’s feelings
towards the physical nature of his victims and Louis. After reading Louis’s interview in
The Vampire Lestat, Lestat desires to find Louis and the language about him is quite
romantic:
“In fact, after reading his account of things, I ached for
him, ached for his romantic illusions, and even his
dishonesty. I ached even for his gentlemanly malice and his
physical presence, the deceptively soft sound of his
voice….Of course I hated him for the lies he told about me.
But the love was far greater than the hate. He had shared
the dark and romantic years of the nineteenth century with
me, he was my companion as no other immortal had ever
been.”45
Lestat “aches” for Louis, the language is both sexual, but romantic in the sense that the
bond between the is eternal. The blood bond between the two individuals trumps any lies
or misfortune that Louis wishes upon Lestat because he will miss and desire him either
way. Yurguis captures the relationship that vampires have with one another as well as a
possible metaphorical meaning. She believes that vampires are able to be promiscuous

45

Rice, Anne. Interview With The Vampire. 1976. p.16

53
and erotic in a non-physical way, which doesn’t jeopardize their existence. Their
fantasies are one sided, non-dangerous modes of sexual satisfaction.46
The vampires in Interview with The Vampire and The Vampire Lestat are nothing
from the original lore. They are a separation of the Victorian Era vampire or the Stoker’s
Dracula. There is no room for vampires that exists in the way of the Eastern European
vampires, which are nothing but wraiths— ghost-like renditions of the 19th century
vampire. In this world where vampires co-exist with humans, sexuality and desire are
predominate in a materialistic culture. Rice’s vampires are not bound by the old myths
and they are free to indulge in their immortality. They are invincible, indestructible and
not deterred by societal pressure. They are not hidden away within decrepit castles along
a mountain; vampires are easily accessible in french-styled townhouses and penthouse
suite hotel rooms. Their clothing is made of velvet, silk— the society that they live within
is filled with people who wear brilliant colors, longhaired men, androgynous women,
skin tight clothing and skimpy skirts. The vampire figure is a normalized entity in a space
of liberation and freedom of sexualityy and expression, the space is as bizarre as the
vampire itself. Rice’s vampire narrative is not weighed down with anxiety over sexual
repression; instead it is a celebration of sexual freedom. The narrative silences societal
anxieties so that they are able to freely immerse themselves in the experience of the
vampire.
Still, what do these vampires in this text represent? If we believe the vampires to
be a social commentary on the outbreak of AIDS during the 1980’s, we still have

46

Yurguis, Katia. ""The Dark Gift"" Accessed April 22, 2016.

54
Interview with The Vampire, which was published before The Vampire Lestat. This
narrative follows the biography of Louis and has less to do with the vibrant culture of
New Orleans unlike the other narrative, so what then does Louis represent in Rice’s
narrative. The vampire still exists as the “other”, this is not lost in the reconstruction of
the vampire narrative, but they are more human-like. These vampires feel fear,
compassion, sadness, and love. These human characteristics were not lost during their
transition from human to vampire. In both novels, vampirism is metaphorical for
homoeroticism or at least the erasure of boundaries and anxieties around sex and sexual
pleasure. However, in Interview with The Vampire, there is a complex relationship
between love and lust. As aforementioned, the relationships between many of the
vampires are complicated— depending on their previous relationship (mother and son),
their gender (homoeroticism) and age (Claudia and Louis). The relationship between
vampires is less sexual and more on the physical contact they can offer one another:
“Rice’s vampires focus not on the anatomy but the total experience
and proximity and contact, offering an alternative, disease-free
erotic fantasy for human imagination. Rice’s narrative also plays
on the fears and anxieties of being transformed by this
experience.”47
The transformation process is more than the physical change to one’s body or the act of
becoming undead. Louis is a conflicted being and he often agonizes over the act of
ending the life of others just for the sake of feeding. As a human he was more or less
suicidal, but he viewed himself as a weak being and was unable to end his life. Louis is a

47

Yurguis, Katia. ""The Dark Gift"" (p.7)

55
morally conflicted person and will often feed from criminals rather than the innocent in
his attempts to not become a monster.
Louis depicts Lestat as a monster, which Lestat vehemently argues against in his
autobiography, The complexity of Rice’s vampires is the personality and characteristics
of her immortal beings, who have moral conflicts yet find a way to participate in the life
around them. However, with a physical freedom of her vampires, they are often plagued
by moral constraints. Battling one's own desire, needs and existence creates a very
conflicted vampire. There is no lust for the human body, but rather lust for blood, which
is just as passionate or intimate in the interaction with vampires and their prey.
New Orleans, Louisiana is the new home of the vampire or at least makes these
vampires an “Americanized” vampire narrative. New Orleans is a lively place, filled
with sexual freedom of the individuals that exists there. Unlike Dracula, who is hidden
away in the Carpathian Mountains, these vampires exist within the public sphere and
fully participate in the culture that exists there. Lestat, unlike Louis, relishes in his
vampire nature and lives his life on the basis of freedom and indulgence. The city of New
Orleans during the 1980’s, allows for a time in which self-expression and more
importantly sexual freedom can exist.
In comparison to Stoker, these vampires embrace sexuality, physical contact and
unadulterated lust. Stoker’s vampires represented a hypersexualized version of these
feelings which he used to present as a negative aspect of society. Of course, these
feelings or hypersexualized individuals were women in contrast to Rice’s sexual male
vampires. Lestat is representative of the sexuality and eroticism that vampirism can offer

56
to the individual. The ritual between blood giving ceremony or transformation results in
the eternal bond between two individuals who then become lovers. The process and
ceremony is an intimate performance. Despite the vampire narrative that rice creates, the
anxieties of the author seep into the text and they merge into a single narrative; a
narrative that makes the characters and author inseparable from one another. The
characters become a manifestation of the author’s anxieties, personalities and beliefs. For
example, New Orleans is a major setting in Rice’s novels; the city also plays a major role
in the life of Rice. By placing the familiar within the unfamiliar or fictional world, Rice
creates an alternate reality, one that is allows for the movement of her vampires.
Similar to Dracula, the vampire does not represent one single anxiety that
presents itself in the text. Louis stands in for loss and the anger, confusion and moral
conflicts that arise with immorality and lust for blood. The narrative’s historical silence is
that of the current state of the homoerotic culture during the 1980’s, or more specifically
the appearance of HIV/AIDS during this time in the United States. New Orleans, a major
city that Rice is familiar with, is a melting pot filled with lively individuals. In this world,
Louis and Lestat are a stand in, together they are representative of a same sex couple.
They have a sexual freedom, which allows them to occupy the space that enables Rice to
commentate and challenge public opinion. She validates this experience with the
interaction of the vampires with each other, society and pushing the sexual boundaries or
lack thereof that exist within the narrative. When it comes to relationships in Rice’s
Vampire Chronicles series, the erotic language and relationships is a tangled web of
lovers and victims. In order to create a vampire, a maker must drain their victim before

57
giving them their blood in return. After the exchange is done, the fledglings life in a state
between that of the living and dead, it is a cyclical existence.
The creation of the vampire in this way would put any person living in state of
paranoia in a state of distress. Since the vampire is neither living nor dead, but exists in a
state of being, vampirism is an infectious disease that spreads through the creation and
passing of blood to a fledgling. The vampire figure itself, is representative of several
things. In The Vampire Lestat and Interview with The Vampire, vampires are relative to
each character and their relationship to Rice and then the audience. In this case they
become an emotional outlet, an erotic desire, representation of a homosexual relationship
and defender of it as well. Anne Rice strives to normalize the relationship between her
vampire characters and the audience in order to create an understanding of sexual
freedom, while rewriting the vampire narrative.
Rice creates a new culture surrounding the vampires. Her vampires are a sexual
and free to do as they please. They exist alongside one another and engage in society.
This type of behavior of the vampires is mimicked and the rejection of the Stoker’s
Dracula is a recurring process in many vampire narratives. It is common in contemporary
vampire narratives for the vampires to be handsome or pretty, rich and a conflicted moral
being. All of these characteristics came from “The Vampire Chronicles” series, in which
she creates the origin story for the “American Vampire”. This duality in the vampire
nature began with Rice’s vampires— they are both human and vampire. This is more so a
“Western vampire phenomena.” The initial shift began with Carl Laemmle and Tod
Browning’s Dracula that “americanized” Stoker’s original narrative. The film paved the

58
way for Anne Rice’s own narrative to gain footing and instead of drawing from Dracula;
she disengages from the European vampire narrative. These different works demonstrate
the malleability of the vampire trope.
In contemporary vampire narratives, the vampire is still an erotic figure, but they
are romantic vampires. Similar to Interview with The Vampire and The Vampire Lestat,
Meyer’s vampire narrative reconstructs the vampire narrative. Meyer’s Twilight is
important to the vampire timeline for several reasons. First, the popularity of the vampire
narrative cannot be denied, especially among teenagers and young adults. Meyer tosses
away the menacing and slightly unattractive Dracula trope in favor of Rice’s alluring
characterization of the vampire. Second, Meyer’s narrative grounds the vampire narrative
in the West so that it is truly an “Americanized” narrative. In her narrative, she includes
Native Americans and adds on more folklore to the vampire narrative. Third, Meyer
introduces werewolves, another supernatural being, into the narrative. This allows for
interactions between werewolves, humans, and vampires all at once. More importantly,
her vampires are dateable, they are less of a fearful “other” and presented as more of an
“exoticized other”. Finally, Meyer deals with her fair share of sexual anxieties, religious
symbolism, and lore which is much more different than Stoker and Rice.

59
Chapter 3- The Romantic Vampire figure in Twilight
Twilight is a familiar franchise to many, the novel is not only popular but it earned
a spot on New York Times Bestseller. The Twilight film was just as popular and had a
high grossing amount of $190 million from just the first film alone. Whether someone
saw the Hollywood version or read the book on their way to work or school, Twilight’s
name has become as familiar as Dracula. However, Twilight is often thought of first as a
romance and then as a vampire narrative. Often you hear, “that’s a better love story than
Twilight.” This is a negative critique amongst the anti- fan base that has formed around
this series. The romance of Twilight has transferred outside of the vampire narrative. The
lead characters, Robert Pattinson and Kristen Stewart have become synonymous with
their characters, Edward and Bella.48 Romance in both the movie and novel were the key
elements. So, if this is thought of as a romance, what does the supernatural or vampires
offer in this narrative? The vampire is a versatile figure and the role of vampires in
Twilight because is similar to its predecessors in the fact that it alludes to a greater issue
at large. Essentially, the vampires in Twilight help teens and young adults navigate the
pressures of sex, relationships and high school.
In the Vampire Chronicles, Anne Rice helped shape and mold what we now know
to as the “American vampire”, which is the reinvention of Stoker’s own vampire
narrative, Dracula. The fearsome monster in Rice’s narrative is an exoticized “other”, a
being that indulges in sexual pleasure and physical contact without disrupting social
order. Thus, the vampire has remained in the adult sphere for quite some time, but in
48

The Twilight movies were a sensation and the lead characters, Robert Pattinson and Kristen
Stewart became synonymous with their characters Edward and Bella.

60
contemporary novels, vampires are not full adults, instead they are teens. In Meyer’s
Twilight, the vampire is a romantic figure, not as sexualized as the figures in Stoker or
Rice’s work, but they fit within the spectrum nonetheless. Twilight is the reimagination of
the vampire narrative as it moves away from what has been seen as an adult fictional
genre. With Twilight, the vampire has now become accessible to teens and young adults.
In order to accomplish this, Meyer transforms the fearsome figure into a romantic figure
and places it within the romance genre. The vampire narrative has now become a love
story and not just any—it is a tragedy.
Meyer’s writing is influenced by many of the great classics such as Jane Austen,
Charlotte Brontë, and William Shakespeare. These authors have their roots both in poetry
and of course, romance. In reimagining the vampire, Meyer seems to draw from the
classical tale of Romeo and Juliet or the Shakespearean love story trope, which is just as
eternal as the vampire figure. What more can you ask for in a story? Shakespearean
romances have drama, romance and most of all tragedy. Also, Meyer draws on the figure
of romantic heroes. Edward is a dark, brooding man; he’s inaccessible by his vampire
nature. He is alluring and elusive, similar to Jane Austen’s Darcy in Pride and Prejudice
or Emily Bronte’s Heathcliff. This consists of a internally tortured male characters that
soon overcomes their flawed nature for the sake of romance and love. These key
elements and characteristics weave together a narrative that pulls on the heartstrings of
the audience and places the vampire into a vampiric Romeo.
Twilight draws on the idea of star-crossed lovers, which is a common trope for
Shakespearean romance as well. On one level, you know the two lovers are doomed

61
from the start, but their tenacity draws you in and their tragic end leaves you breathless.
This very essence creates Meyer’s vampire narrative; it is a story about young love and
the hardships that come with that unbridled love. However, the tragic nature of the
vampire and the complicated relationship between the human and vampire is what makes
this story a Shakespearean drama. This romantic plot has become timeless; the eternal
struggle between one's love and nature of their being reappears in contemporary novels
such as Twilight.
Twilight may be the last thing one thinks of when tracing the vampire narrative.
Vampires are present in the text, but this shifts completely away from Rice’s hypersexual
vampires. However, they embody the compassionate, human-like rendition of vampires
introduced in the 1970’s. Meyer creates a vampire narrative that captures the
characteristics of being human while remaining a creature of the night. Twilight is a
paranormal teen romance49 novel, which is a combination of romance, supernatural and
young adult (YA). The vampire’s appearance in Meyer’s vampire series is not incidental
because as proven before, the vampire is a malleable figure. However, by observing the
role of Edward and his human interest, Bella, one can begin to shift through the true
meaning of the vampire within the text. In order to understand the relationship between
Edward and Bella in, it is easier to imagine Twilight as a modern spin on the tale of
Romeo and Juliet. Instead, these two star-crossed lovers that have made their way to the
supernatural narrative of Meyer’s alternate reality, which both vampires and werewolves
run the night. In this narrative, the dashingly handsome Edward plays the role of Romeo
49

Paranormal Teen Romance- is a genre for teens and tweens at Barnes and Noble and
elsewhere. It is a blooming genre, which combines gothic literature, romance, young adult and
fantasy. This is a subcategory for paranormal romance, which Meyer leads.

62
and Isabella “Bella” Swan fulfills her role as Juliet. Though the narrative takes the form
of the Shakespearean tale it is anything but natural; the supernatural roam free occupy the
space in which adolescent and teenage angst mold the text under the guise of first love.
The narrative begins with Bella Swan leaving her home in Phoenix, Arizona in
order to live with her father “Charlie.” Immediately, Meyer draws on the same classic
trope of ostracizing individuals, which makes it easier for the vampire to enter the
narrative. Bella arrives in Forks, Washington which is similar to Stoker’s technique of
locking away the vampire or removing them from society. Forks, Washington is
Dracula’s new castle. Anne Rice’s colorful and flamboyant New Orleans setting is cast
aside. Forks not only displaces Bella, but puts her in the extreme of the region. Within the
first few pages Bella describes her new home to the reader:
“In the Olympic Peninsula of northwest Washington State, a small town
named Forks exists under a near-constant cover of clouds. It rains on this
inconsequential town more than any other place in the United States of
America. It was from this town and its gloomy, omnipresent shade that my
mother escaped with me when I was only a few months old… It was now
Forks that I now exiled myself— an action that took with great horror. I
detested Forks.”50
Forks is a small town, which she confines herself to out of love for her mother, who took
her from this small town at a very young age. The town is described as “gloomy” and
“rainy,” which are key elements in the gothic trope, which creates this type environment
in hopes of creating an atmospheric effect, one that conceals the true intentions of the
narrative and adds onto the enigma of the story. Also, this creates an environment that

50

Meyer, Stephenie. Twilight. (p.3-4)

63
Bella is now trapped within. A place that is she considers to be the “other” or “unnatural”
to her. This is an environment that brings and creates great discomfort.
Furthermore, Washington is at the most northwestern corner of the United States.
This western location is parallel to Stoker’s own Eastern Europe. The foreignness of the
Carpathian Mountains is parallel to the lush green nature of Forks, Washington. This is a
place where the supernatural can exist under the cover of clouds and rain. The
environment creates a feeling of entrapment and impending doom, “when I landed in Port
Angeles, it was raining. I didn’t see it as an omen— just unavoidable. I’d already said my
goodbyes to the sun.”51 The “impending doom” part may be a little heavy handed, but the
inescapable feeling is still present; Bella has already “said her goodbyes to the sun.” With
this casting away of the outside world to the confines of Forks, Meyer can now fully
immerse the Bella and the audience within her vampire world.
Meyer creates her vampiric space in two ways: through isolation or ostracization
of the characters and combining the fictional world with actual historical narratives or
realism. By merging the real world with the fantastical world of the vampire, Meyer is
able to weave a vampire narrative that is validated by the real world. Forks, Washington
is a real location, similarly to Rice’s New Orleans setting. Without a doubt, the reader is
able to understand that these locations are authentic and so there is some truth in her
vampire narrative. Also, in closing them within the space of a town, the narrative, people
and culture are carefully manipulated around a vampire character. The surrealism of
vampires and werewolves simply merge together. Furthermore, the realism that Meyer

51

Twilight pg.5

64
draws from is the local legend of Forks, Washington, which centers on the indigenous
narrative of the Quileute Nation.
In reality, Twilight’s setting is enriched in culture and home to an indigenous
narrative that exists within the narrative as well as outside. Before Meyer discloses the
full history of her vampires, the Cullens, the Quileute Nation is first revealed. The
Quileute Nation’s narrative was used to situate the vampire narrative within a historical
frame. This is executed during the conversation between Jacob and Bella as he explains
the local urban legends at the reservation.
“Do you know any of our old stories, about where we came from— the
Quileutes, I mean? He began.’
“Not really,’ I admitted.’
“Well, there are lots of legends, some of them claiming to date back to the
Flood— supposedly, the ancient Quileutes tied their canoes to the tops of
the trees on the mountain to survive like Noah and the ark.’ He smiled, to
show me how little stock he put in the histories.’ “Another legend claims
that we descended from wolves— and that the wolves are our brothers
still. It’s against tribal law to kill them. Then there are the stories about the
cold ones.’ His voice dropped a little lower.”52
Meyer easily slips the history of the cold ones, her fictitious background of the vampire
into the Quileute Nation’s historical narrative that already exists in Washington. During
their conversation, Jacob refers to the “Flood,” and after some general research one can
find that this event took place in the Quileute’s narrative. According to their ancient
creation story, a wandering “Transformer” changed the Quileutes from wolves to a
human form. The only kindred that were once tied to the Quileute nation, the Chimakum
Tribe, which was washed away by the “Flood” and left the Quileute tribe without any
52

Twilight pg.124

53

65

known relatives. Since this narrative already exists, Meyer’s own vampire can exist
beside this pre-existing historical narrative. Though it places the spotlight on a Native
American tribe from the Pacific Northwest, the Quileute tribe, their narrative validates
and verifies Meyers own. Instead of journal entries like Dracula, one has the Quileute
nation’s narrative to confirm the existence of these vampires, or as Jacob states, “they are
the same ones.” By merging her own narrative with a historical narrative that already
exists, Meyer is creating an alternate reality in which her own historical narrative
intertwines with the supernatural reality of vampires. Now that the historical narrative of
the Quileutes nation and Forks, Washington has been set, who exactly are the Cullens?
According to Edward, the Cullen family began with the creation of Carlisle. The
most noticeable aspect of Carlisle’s history is when Edward states “he (Carlisle) was
studying in Italy when he discovered the others there. They were much more civilized
and educated than the wraiths of the London Sewers.”54 In Meyer’s narrative, she
predates Carlisle’s existence before that of Count Dracula, which means Carlisle, would
have been in the London sewers even before Jonathan’s existence. This not only predates
Dracula, but insinuates that London is full of “uncivilized” vampires. Also, Carlisle’s
history throws a shadow over Count Dracula’s own origin because Stoker doesn’t give an
actual birthdate for Count Dracula. This means in Meyer’s narrative, Carlisle is older
than Stoker’s own vampire creation— Count Dracula. Carlisle’s history is also a contrast
to Rice’s own narrative, specifically the journey both Claudia and Louis take in order to
53

"Joomla Templates." Quileute Nation. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.quileutenation.org/history.
54
Twilight pg.340

66
meet other vampires in Eastern Europe. Why does she do this? One reason may be that
Italy is the place of love, romance and culture and this is a romantic tragedy of some sort.
In the end, Carlisle leaves the Old World for the New World, which centers the vampire
narrative in America.
The main attention of Meyer’s vampires however is given to teenage/young adult
vampires that attend Bella’s high school. Though Meyer’s vampires are not as
flamboyant as Rice’s Lestat de Lioncourt, they are just as alluring and eye catching. Bella
first meets the Cullen “siblings” during her first day of school. When she first lays eyes
on the Cullen family, she is in awe over their unnatural beauty and grace. The Cullens are
unlike anyone she has encountered so far and their abnormal beauty causes them to stand
out and exist as the “other.” The “other” that is different from the mass majority, but
desired because of the beauty that each one contains.
“The didn’t look anything alike. Of the three boys, one was big—
muscled like a serious weight lifter, with dark, curly hair. Another
was taller, leaner, but still muscular and honey blond He was more
boyish than the others, who looked like they could be in college, or
even teachers here rather than students. The girls were the
opposites. The tall one was statuesque. She had a beautiful figure,
the kind you saw on the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit
issue, the kind that made every girl around her take a hint on her
self-esteem just by being in the same room. Her hair was golden,
gently waving to the middle of her back. The short girl was
pixielike, think in the extreme, with small features. Her hair was a
deep black, cropped short and pointing in every direction. And yet,
they were all exactly alike. Every one of them was a chalky pale,
the palest of all the students living in a sunless town. Paler than
me, the albino. They all had very dark eyes despite the range in
hair tones. They also had dark shadows under those eyes—
purplish, brusielike shadows….I stared because their faces, so
different, were all devastatingly, inhumanly beautiful.”55
55

Twilight pg.18-19

67
The Cullen family members are physically different, which is why they are all “adopted”
rather than described as biological siblings. Meyer describes each one vampire in great
detail, each vampire is characteristically different, such as ‘golden hair’ versus ‘cropped
hair.’ Even though they are drastically different from one another there is a key
“sameness” to them as well. They are “inhumanely beautiful,” which amplifies the
“otherness” of these vampire characters, but their desirability as well. The vampires in
Twilight are similar to Rice’s own vampires. The Cullen’s beauty, uniqueness and
defining characteristics castaway Count Dracula’s undesirable features. In this narrative,
as well as other contemporary vampire narratives, Dracula vampire is thrown away and
the divine/alluring vampire is formed. These vampires are graceful, desirable, beautiful
and striking, which makes them appealing to the human eye. Like Bella observes, they
are different yet the same and that sameness is their vampire nature. A characteristic that
Meyer hints at being the “purplish bruises.” The vampires are physically different in size;
eye color and hair but a distinguishable feature is the bruises under their eyes. Despite
their ability to look different they are still the same in nature— vampires. The Cullens are

68
appealing to Bella, not in just their beauty but their “otherness” as well.

56

(The Cullens in the movie “Twilight”) fig.4

The otherness is a comfort for Bella. In a way she feels that she and the vampires both
have a lot in common.
“I felt a surge of both pity, and relief. Pitty because, as beautiful as they
were, they were outsiders, clearly not accepted. Relief that I wasn't the
only newcomer here, and certainly not the most interesting by any
standard.”57
Bella is relieved that she herself and the Cullens are both newcomers. Her feelings of
both ‘pity’ and ‘relief’ reflect the complications and anxieties that arise while being an
adolescent. No one wants to be labeled as the outsider and this is an anxiety that Bella
holds throughout the novel. The existence of vampires normalizes her in a way, but also
glorifies her difference from the people of Forks. She is different and an outsider,
therefore she can socialize with the Cullens.
In comparison to the Cullen family, Bella considers herself to be extremely
ordinary. She has an acute self-conscious nature, which in her opinion, demonstrates how
plain and ordinary she is compared to others. Despite living in Phoenix, Arizona she
didn’t tan at all or athletic in any form. In other words, Isabella Swan is an outsider in her
56

https://www.google.com/search?q=the+cullens+at+the+table
Twilight pg.22

57

69
own rights. Her outsider status, her ease with the Cullens is hinting at something much
deeper than appearance alone. In fact, Bella occupies a complex space— she plays both
the damsel in distress and Juliet to Edward’s Romeo.A damsel in distress dates back to
the Middle Ages, there is usually a woman/girl in a dire situation and a chivalrous man
swoops in and saves her from demise. In the end he is rewarded for his bravery, usually
through a token of her favor or love, which may be synonymous in the situation.
Regardless, Bella is constantly in dangerous situations, whether it’s her clumsiness or the
danger she attracts, Edward is soon there to save her. Bella’s role which is due, “Possibly
my(her) crippling clumsiness was(is) seen as endearing rather than pathetic, casting
me(her) as a damsel in distress.”58 Whatever the case may be, Edward Cullen is there to
save her, which he feels is equally as dangerous because tends to attract things that are
bad for her. The examples are numerous, she is often claims to be clumsy, a group of men
tried to rape her, she was almost crushed by a truck, and a vampire hunter her down and
broke her leg. There are more instances in the novel, but the attraction of Edward to Bella
is the biggest danger of them all. Edward serves as both protector and predator, which are
similar due to his vampire nature. This is where the true star-crossed lover scenario takes
over.
The relationship between Edward and Bella is precarious. Edward often states that
Bella is fragile and he could kill her in an instant. There is an allusion to Romeo and
Juliet in the relationship between Edward and Bella. It was Juliet’s beauty that first
enticed Romeo and this is similar to the attraction that Edward has for Bella.

58

Twilight pg.55

70
“I found myself caught up in your expressions…
and every now and then you would stir the air with your hand or your hair,
and the scent would stun me again…”59
Edward loves the humanness Bella has to offer, her “scent” and “expressions” are what
captivates Edward. Their love is similarly face paced and without reason. Bella was
captivated by Edward’s beauty and his “otherness.” The relationship between them has a
lot at stake. The treaty between the vampires and werewolves, at La Push, if Bella is
harmed in anyway the treaty will be void. The Cullens won’t be able to stay in Forks any
longer, however these are aspects of teenage romance. There is no logic, only passion and
what is thought to be love. In the end, it is merely obsession, obsession with beauty, grace
and humanness. Vampires are Bella’s way of escaping dull Forks, the place where
everyone knew each other.
The vampires in Twilight share some characteristics with Stoker and Rice’s
vampires, but they are definitely unusual. There are two types of vampires that exist at
this time, the first being the hunter, which are vampires similar to the wandering
vampires that the Cullens encounter. These vampires live nomadic lives and feed off the
blood of humans. The second is the coven, the Cullen family is one of the largest covens
and their lifestyle is based off living in permanent residency. Though there are other
covens, the Cullen family live are seen as peculiar to other vampires because of their
feeding habits, which is the hunting of animals. This is not the first time that someone
depicts vampires as feeding off of animal blood. In Interview with The Vampire, Louis
explains that he and Claudia fed off rats on the ship when they went to Eastern Europe.
59

Twilight pg.272

71
The Cullen family achieves this alternative lifestyle as they hunt for animals that better
suit their tastes. After Bella’s conversation with Jacob, she decides to do some research
on her own; she starts by typing in the word “vampire.”
“When the results came up, there was a lot to sift through— everything
from movies and TV shows to role playing games, underground metal,
and gothic cosmetic companies.60
Bella’s research demonstrates the hold vampires had on the human world. In Bella’s
reality, vampires exist but as nothing more than a fictionalized reality.61Vampires exist in
pop culture as games, movies and underground metal. Maybe, Bella came across Lestat’s
band in the process, but this scene demonstrates how vampires have literally bled into
society. Their existence is nothing more than a highly commoditized niche or camp
within mainstream society. However, there are two quotes that Bella reads on the website
and they are both equally important in both the construction of the vampire narrative and
the representation or symbolism within this novel. The first is by Montague Summers and
it’s an excerpt from his from his novel The Vampire, His Kith and Kin, which is an
investigation of the vampire myth. The quote that Bella finds on the website is as follows:
“Throughout the vast shadowy world of ghosts and demons there is no
figure so terrible, no figure so dreaded and abhorred yet delightful with
such fearful fascination, as the vampire, who is himself neither ghost nor
demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the
mysterious and terrible qualities of both.” --Rev. Montague Summers62
This quote is a complete contrast to the angel-like image of the vampire that Bella
describes. Rev. Montague Summers, describes the vampire in the same fashion of Stoker;
60

Twilight pg.133
Fictionalized reality- fiction that is validated or ground in reality. (ex: America versus MordorLord of the Rings made up realm)
62
Twilight pg.133
61

72
they are horrid creatures that are inherently evil. What is interesting about this quote is
that the vampire is “neither ghost nor demon.” The vampire is often placed within two
existences— human or monster, dead or alive, angel or devil— they exist on the cusp, yet
never teeter over to either side. Their existence is a duality or rather a synchronous
balance between two extremes. The quote captures the nature of the vampire that society
is accustomed to, an image that even influences the way Edward views himself— a
monster, damned to hell for all eternity.
The second quote has a similar effect on the vampire narrative or rather proof of
its existence. The quote following the first is from none other than Rousseau.
“If there is in this world a well--attested account, it is that of the vampires.
Nothing is lacking: official reports, affidavits of well-known people, of surgeons,
of priests, of magistrates; the judicial proof is most complete. And with all that,
who is there who believes in vampires?”— Rousseau63
This quote is from Rousseau’s Letter to Beaumont” 1764, but the quote itself is
incomplete. The last sentence is missing, “Will we all be damned for not having
believed?” Why did Meyer not include this tidbit of information, did she not want to
darken the seemingly light, romantic text with such a dire question? The quote claims
that there are numerous documentations on the existence of vampires and each of the
sources come from highly respected individuals. There is no crazed Renfield telling us of
Count Dracula’s existence from the asylum, the quote comes from a philosopher. What’s
more is that he claims “judicial proof is most complete” and this judicial proof is given
by logic, psychology, and general experience, and illustrated in judicial trial. Overall, the
quotes validate the vampire’s existence within the narrative; they further ground the
63

Twilight pg.133-134

73
vampire into reality because the quotes are by men that exist in reality. By claiming this
reality, Meyer is able to manipulate the vampire narrative.
Meyer’s narrative is parallel to the reality of the world; the historical narrative
that she ties into her fiction makes an alternate reality. Prominent figures like Rousseau
have a voice in this. What’s the purpose/reason for quoting these individuals? They
validate her vampire narrative, though she is essentially making her own, Meyer is
drawing on a reality that is familiar to the readers in order situate the Cullens. However,
similar to Rice she breaks free from the constraints of Dracula. The first being that
Edward and his siblings are able to go out into the sunlight,
“Edward in the sunlight was shocking. I couldn’t get use to it, though I’d
been staring at him all afternoon. His skin, white despite the faint flush
from yesterday’s hunting trip, literally sparkled, like thousands of tiny
diamonds were embedded in the surface. He lay perfectly still in the grass,
his shirt open over his sculpted, incandescent chest, his scintillating arms
bare, His glistening, pale lavender lids were shut, though of course he
didn’t sleep. A perfect statue, carved in some unknown stone, smooth like
marble, glittering like crystal.”64
When it comes to sunlight in the vampire narrative, it is quite tricky to pinpoint the effect
it may have on the vampire. For example: as Claudia and Madeleine demonstrate in
Interview with The Vampire, the sunlight is fatal to vampires. On impact the vampires is
scorched by the rays and turned into nothing but ashes. However, the sunlight in Dracula
only weakens the Count and he is not able to shape shift as often as he could during the
nighttime. Since there is no definitive rule on sunlight within the vampire narrative,
Meyer’s vampire are able to sparkle in the sunlight. Edward is described as having pale,

64

Twilight pg.260

74
cold, hard and reflective skin. His exterior makes it possible for the sunlight o glint off
the surface, also the possibility of having ones boyfriend suddenly combust is not a
romantic outcome. Though, the use of sunlight is different in every vampire narrative,
Meyer is similar to Rice in her rejection of Dracula’s limitations.
In Dracula, the Count is strictly bound to the rules of vampirism. Count Dracula
is affected by religious items, water, sunlight and staking. The vampires in Twilight are
almost invincible and few things can actually destroy them. When Bella questions
Edward about vampire myths, he rejects them all:
“Don’t laugh — but how can you come out during the
daytime?
He laughed anyway. “Myth”
Burned by the sun?’
“Myth.’
“Sleeping in coffins?’
“Myth.” 65
This line of questioning is parallel to the conversation between the journalist and Louis in
Interview with The Vampire. A simple Q&A format which clarifies the myth of the
authors vampires. Within a few lines Meyer rejects the majority of vampire myths, even
the ever popular one of being burned by the sun.
“Will you turn into a bat?’ I asked warily. He laughed, louder than I’d ever
heard. “Like I haven’t heard that one before!” 66(p.279)
Meyer’s use of drawing on these vampire myths is in order to have a light-hearted
dismissal of these vampire myths from her narrative. Even though there is a clear

65
66

Twilight pg.185-186
Twilight pg.279

75
dismissal of Stoker and Rice’s myth from her own narrative, there isn’t a clear
explanation on her vampire legends as well.
“Do you think I could walk down the street in the sunlight without causing
traffic accidents? There’s reason why we chose the Olympic Peninsula,
one of the most sunless places in the world. It’s nice to be able to go
outside in the day. You wouldn’t believe how tired you can get of
nighttime in eighty-odd years.’ “So that’s where the legends came from?’
“Probably.” 67
However, her dismissal of Stoker’s vampire myth and Rice’s vampires allows for hyper
realism of Meyer’s vampires. These characters literally spill outside the text as
demonstrated with in terms of Bella and Edward’s relationship. Robert Pattinson and
Kristen Stewart, key characters in the Hollywood production of Twilight began to date
during the movie series production. The vampire aspect wasn’t a transferrable feature, but
the romance between Edward and Bella was. Meyer’s vampires offer a safer alternative
to the sexual vampires that were created in the 1980’s to combat the fear of physical love.
Bella and Edward indulge in an emotional love. This emotional love is restrictive and
heavily monitored; each of these characters is careful in the ways they choose to
demonstrate love.
“I caressed his cheek, delicately stroked his eyelid, the purple shadow in
the hollow under his eye. I traced the shape of his perfect nose, and then,
so carefully, his flawless lips. His lips parted under my hand, and I could
feel his cool breath on my fingertips. I wanted to lean in, to inhale the
scent of him. So I dropped my hand, not wanting to push him too far.68
The vampires are desirable, “flawless” angelic-like creatures that are dangerous by their
very nature, yet tamable by the mere action of love. Similar to the point made about
67
68

Twilight pg.291
Twilight pg.277

76
Rice’s vampires, [Meyer’s] “vampires focus not on the anatomy but the total experience
and proximity and contact, offering an alternative, disease-free erotic fantasy for human
imagination.”69The relationship between Edward and Bella is more innocent than the
relationship between Lestat and Louis. Rice’s language implies that something is taking
place within the coffin, but there is no mystery about what is happening in the bedroom
with Edward and Bella. Meyer brings the audience into what is considered an intimate
space, but it is an innocent space because nothing sexual is occurring.
Young and old delve into the world of Meyer’s vampires and one can’t help but
wonder why these particular vampires are appealing to both age groups. First, Edward
Cullen helps young readers to experience love, lust and sexual desire, which are
contained by the vampire figure. The novel is a romance, but is carefully monitored by
friends, Charlie (Bella’s father) and Edward who rejects Bella’s more intimate advances.
Also, Edward is dangerous just as he is alluring. The juxtaposition between the two is a
constant reminder that this is not a simple alluring teen. He is a vampire and therefore he
is dangerous. Chastity is sacred in the text and nothing happens until (spoiler alert) until
after they’re married. Despite the sexual desire and tension in Twilight that arises
between Edward and Bella, they do nothing more than kiss or hold on to one another. The
relationship is virginal, pure and subdued. Even the act of feeding is a restrictive act. In
the text as it is simply confined to the hunting of animals. Those that hunt animals have
golden eyes and those that hunt humans have red eyes; there is a hierarchical othering in
the act of vampirism. It insinuates that the Cullens are “one of the better ones”. The
69

Yurguis, Katia. ""The Dark Gift"" (p.7)

77
Cullens are vampires, but don’t behave in a fashion that is associated with vampirism. It
is also important to note that once the vampire bites a human an immediate
transformation begins to take place. There is no time to indulge or enjoy the blood of the
victim. Unlike Rice’s vampire narrative, Meyer’s vampire transition is extremely painful
and undesirable. Thus this sets limitations through the usage of pain. Louis’s ecstatic
sensation of being a vampire is lost in this narrative, instead there awaits only an
intolerable amount of pain and death for Meyer’s vampires.
The differences in Meyer’s vampires compared to other vampire narratives are
plentiful. However, Rice began the complex vampire character or the idea that vampires
can retain their human characteristics, which is adopted by Meyer. The vampires are
complicated figures in her novel. Meyer’s vampires have humanistic qualities and so they
are able to maintain sympathetic creatures. Each of the Cullens was created without their
consent and so the struggle between their human nature and vampire nature. These
vampires have feelings. Edward similar to Louis in their romantic sentiments, but
actually there are numerous similarities. Both are in love with mortality or that human
nature should remain as such. They are adverse to the creation of fledglings, but
nonetheless they desire a connection and both are plagued by their vampire natures.
Further into the novel, Twilight, Edward opens up more about his plights with
vampirism. In many of his arguments with Bella, Edward takes a hard stance against his
vampire nature. It is a critical view, which he sees himself as a monster.
“What’s you definition? But he ignored my question and asked me
another. “Do you think that I could be scary?...I decided to go with the
truth. “Hmmm… I think you could be, if you wanted to.’ “Are you

78
frightened of me now?’ The smile vanished, and his heavenly face was
suddenly serious.”70
The state of nature his vampire nature is in conflict with his human characteristics.
“Well…’ He paused, and then the rest of the words followed in a rush. “I’ve decided as
long as I was going to hell, I might as well do it thoroughly.”71Edward is fixated on the
idea that due to his vampire nature that once he is destroyed that he will be condemned to
hell. Unlike, Rice’s vampires who are weary of the idea of a higher power such as the
Devil or God, Edward is weighed down by this idea. He believes it almost to be a
monstrosity to exist as a vampire. Vampires survive by consuming the blood of their
victims, which is a major sin in the Christian religion. Blood consumption is dangerous
because “he life of the body is in its blood”72 and this leads to the killing or
transformation of the human body. This is the condemnation that Edward faces and he is
aware of the dangers in pursuing a relationship because Bella’s life and soul are at risk.
Edward believes that by changing Bella into a vampire, she too, will be condemned to an
afterlife in hell. Rice’s vampires weren’t as weighed down by those ideas of hell or
eternal damnation. Louis strongly believed that hunting humans were moralistically
wrong, but soon never adopts the “vegetarian diet” that the Cullens rigorously follow.
Instead, Edward’s consumption of human life is in the past and the soul that he has is
damned to hell once he is destroyed. Edwards’s anxiety is not without reason, there is

70

Twilight pg.107
Twilight pg.87
72
17:11 (chapter 17 Verse 11) Or to make atonement for you.
71

79
strictness to his behavior and though it isn’t explicitly stated, boundaries are set in place
for the vampires in the narrative.
Bella is an innocent, pale virgin that is susceptible to not only danger, but love as
well. Edward is her savior and he so the vampire appreciates her. There are boundaries
placed on the role of the vampire, they are domesticated figures— lovers of human
nature. They serve as safe fantasies of romance. Meyer gives young teens a taste of
sensuality that is not overwhelming sexual. Vampires are safe as fulfillers of teenage
notions of love and relationships. Meyer accomplishes by normalizing Bella and
Edward, if we remove the vampire from the narrative, it is simply a teenage love story,
complete with awkward first dates, over protective fathers and the infamous love triangle
(or in Bella’s case the love square). Vampires exist to make the transitional period feel
less overwhelming and the anxiety over sex is contained in a simple yet complex
romance. It is a romantic to feel desired and sought after by an unbelievably rich and
handsome man. The only way for this to happen is of course, by one meeting a vampire
and him falling in love with you. However, this hyper-reality is made possible through
the combination of the vampire and classic gothic and romantic tropes.
In an interview with acclaimed writer, Stephen King, who states that Meyer’s,
“writing to a whole generation of girls and opening up kind of a safe joining of love and
sex in those books. It’s exciting and it’s thrilling and it's not particularly threatening
because they’re not overtly sexual." The vampire is an indestructible, characteristically
human, romantic figure that is not “overtly sexual.” Bella and Edward’s love for one
another is thought of first because that is the most important aspect of their relationship.

80
Their connection does not stem from physical contact, but the contact that they engage in
is careful, measured and appropriate. The vampire is a safeguard against the anxiety that
stems from sexual desire or lust. It is a metaphorical abstinence ring that protects Bella
from her clumsiness and human hormones that way she can focus on school, friends and
her own personal growth. In the end, she will be rewarded with immortality.

(Robert Pattinson and Kristen Stewart as Edward and Bella)

73

https://www.google.com/search?q=bella+and+edward

73

81
Conclusion

The presence of vampires in contemporary literature has become increasingly
popular. Unsurprisingly, there are hundreds of articles, books, and research projects
dedicated to discovering everything about the elusive vampire figure. These sources are
equally dedicated to unearthing the mystery on the origin of the vampire as if their
origins can clarify the myth and their enigmatic existence. There is a possible origin, but
it is lost amongst the piles of vampire material circulating in the world. In fact, it is hard
to determine what are distinguishable features in vampire lore. “Duplicity and ruse are
innate features of vampirism. The undead embody falsehood and all stories about them
serve their cause in one way or another.74 This is precisely the case when it comes to
figuring out vampire lore or the origin story where in most cases vampirism is
fictionalized. Vampire stories served the purpose of creating a fearful “other” that
threatens social order and in the end is defeated by man.
The fearful “other” has been linked to Vlad III, Prince of Wallachia, who killed
his victims in a torturous manner or by impaling them on long poles, which witnesses
claimed even while he ate a meal. As disturbing as that may sound, many believe Vlad
the Impaler to be the origin of vampires, but that is incorrect. Vlad the Impaler was the
inspiration of Dracula and other sources prove the “vampire” is documented before
Stoker’s creation. In this case, popular vampire narratives are taken for truth and often are
the starting point, such as Dracula. However, other narratives like Sheridan Le Fanu’s
74

Butler, Erik. The Rise of the Vampire. London: Reaktion Books, 2013.

82
Carmilla and Lord Byron’s poem, The Giaour” both predate Dracula and are viable
options to the vampire’s beginnings. However, this still leaves the main question
unanswered: what does the appearance of the vampire in a novel signify?
Are they human or monster? Depending on the text they can be either. Twilight
demonstrates the romantic vampire with human-like characteristics. The vampire exists
in many forms; the meaning shifts and depends on the text in order to assign it a role
within the text. The vampire exists as a dark “other”, an anti-hero or fiendish creature that
preys on the innocent. More importantly, the vampire is cursed among the living. It is an
exoctized and ostracized “other” that is both alluring and repelling in the eyes of mortals.
The vampire’s role is constantly shifting; it can play the role of the anti-hero,
villain, or sexualized supernatural creature. However there is a common belief or
accusation in each of the narratives, in which the vampire comes from the devil. This
may be a Christian damnation of the vampire figure, in which beings that are unfamiliar
are then dangerous and from the devil. The creation of vampires is by transforming the
innocent, a body that was once human and made by God, into a fiendish creation that is
of the Devil. The condemnation of vampires is heavily ingrained in religious dogma and
belief system. However, if we cast that aside we are left with Anne Rice’s vampires who
claim, “they have never seen the devil.” In their world, God and Devil play minor roles;
only evil and goodness control their actions. This emphasizes the vampire’s ability to
reason, an ability that is inherently human. If vampires are condemned or subject to moral
judgments, which are all constructs of mortal man, then they too are man.

83
In novels such as Twilight, Interview with the Vampire and The Vampire Lestat,
the vampire’s viewpoint is finally revealed to the audience. The desires, fears and
anxieties of the vampire are exposed and one is able to understand the motives behind the
actions of these creatures. However, the vampire’s viewpoint is rather limited to just a
male perspective. The female vampire is lacking in many narratives, vampire narratives
may shift drastically if the female vampire’s perspective were included in the narrative.
There is Claudia in Interview with The Vampire, Carmilla and the women in Dracula, but
the female vampire is always projected as a hypersexualized being and a tragic end
awaits them in the conclusion.
In each of the novels, vampires function in a multitude of ways. They are eternal
supernatural entities that possess physical bodies. They are representative of the
unspeakable or the fears that can metaphorically manifest. The vampire is a reflection of
personal desires and societal or personal anxiety. They mask the inevitable; the hidden
desires that seep into literary texts as a result of the changing times. Vampires become the
“other”, a feared and desired entity that serves a platform for social commentary. These
vampires are publicized, no longer are they hidden in the shadows but appear in novels,
movies and similar popular platforms. More importantly, vampires are not manifested out
of thin air, vampires are ourselves or at least the anxieties and fears that are hidden away
inside. We only need to pull away from the teeth that are embedded into our necks and
put a stake in it.

84
Bibliography
Auerbach, Nina. Our Vampires, Ourselves. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Bela Lugosi. Photograph. google images. Accessed May 2, 2016.
https://www.google.com/search?q=dracula+bela+lugosi.
Butler, Erik. The Rise of the Vampire. London: Reaktion Books, 2013.
Byron, George. The Giaour. Edited by Peter Cochran. N.p., 1813.
https://petercochran.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/the_giaour1.pdf.
Day, William Patrick. Vampire Legends in Contemporary American Culture: What
Becomes a Legend Most. N.p.: University Press of Kentucky, 2002. Accessed
May 2, 2016. http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt130jsnh.
Dracula (1931). Photograph. google images. Accessed May 2, 2016.
https://www.google.com/search?q=dracula+3+seductress&source=lnms&tbm=isc
h&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj52JX0rzMAhWEKh4KHVRKC2YQ_AUICCgC&biw=1766&bih=1248#imgdii=23
Z_r2mgM0L_OM%3A%3B23Z_r2mgM0L_OM%3A%3B0zZ9L6XC_Cz29M%
3A&imgrc=23Z_r2mgM0L_OM%3A.
Fink, Marty. "AIDS Vampires: Reimagining Illness in Octavia Butler's 'Fledgling.'"
Science Fiction Studies, November 2010, 416-32.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/25746442.
Gordon, Joan, and Veronica Hollinger. Blood Read: The Vampire as Metaphor in
Contemporary Culture. Philadelphia, Pa.: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1997.
Hall, Lesley A. Sex, Gender, and Social Change in Britain since 1880. New York: St.
Martin's Press, 2000.
Inoue, Yoshitaka. "Contemporary Consciousness as Reflected in Images of the Vampire."
Jung Journal: Culture & Psyche, 2011, 83-99. Accessed May 2, 2016.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/jung.2011.5.4.83.
Louis and Lestat. Photograph. google images. Accessed May 2, 2016.
https://www.google.com/search?q=lestat+and+louis.
Melton, J. Gordon. The Vampire Book: The Encyclopedia of the Undead. Detroit: Visible
Ink Press, 1999.
Meyer, Stephenie. Twilight. New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2005.

85
Miller, Andrew H., and James Eli Adams. Sexualities in Victorian Britain. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1996.
Rice, Anne. Interview with the Vampire. New York, NY: Ballantine Books, 1976.
———. The Vampire Lestat. New York: Ballantine Books, 1986.
Stoker, Bram, and John Paul Riquelme. Dracula: Complete, Authoritative Text with
Biographical, Historical, and Cultural Contexts, Critical History, and Essays
from Contemporary Critical Perspectives. New York: Palgrave, 2002.
Winnubst, Shannon. "Vampires, Anxieties, and Dreams: Race and Sex in the
Contemporary United States." Hypatia, 1-20. Accessed May 2, 2016.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3810861.

