Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

"And She is Also Me" Discovering the Womanist
Critique in Brooks, Clifton and Giovanni
Sarah Mooney
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Mooney, Sarah, ""And She is Also Me" Discovering the Womanist Critique in Brooks, Clifton and Giovanni" (2011). Senior Projects
Spring 2011. Paper 83.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/83

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

1

"And She is Also Me" Discovering the
Womanist Critique in the Poetry of
Brooks, Clifton and Giovanni

Senior Project submitted to the Division of Languages
and Literature of Bard College
by
Sarah Mooney

Annanadale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2011

2

"The other dancer has obviously come through it all right, as I have done. She is beautiful, whole
and free. And she is also me"
- Alice Walker ("Beauty" from In Search of Our Mother's Garden)

Doll taught me how to speak
Lynnie taught me how to read
Lois taught me how to think
Sarah taught me "Purple over Pink"

3

Table of Content
Introduction
Chapter One
Reviving "Love" and Motherhood: The Nationalist Critique in Gwendolyn Brooks's Beckonings

Chapter Two
"The Kids are Here Too": The Significance of Black Children and the Womanist Consciousness
in Clifton's Ordinary Woman

Chapter Three
Reclaiming the Body, Redefining the "Space":
Critiquing Feminist and Femininity in Giovanni's My House

Conclusion
Where Do We Go From Here

Bibliography

i

4

Introduction
This project will look to explore the origin of the Womanist critique in poetry of the early
70's, specifically in Gwendolyn Brooks, Lucille Clifton and Nikki Giovanni. The misogynistic
aesthetics of Black Nationalist Movement and the embedded racism within the 70's Feminist
Movement left black women writers and activist seeking a space for their voice and identity. This
space also served to provide political and academic recognition of the long tradition of
community based activism. While the term "Womanist" wasn't introduced until 1983, I believe
that these poets established the foundations for what defines womanist literature and the lens for
its critique. These three women used their poetry to reclaim their feminine identity and continue
the efforts for the black community's liberation. At the same time, these women were fighting to
include the black community into the intellectual studies and academic discourse of American
history. Thier approach to liberation centers around interlocking the issues of black women with
the issues of her community. To understand the importance of what establishing space is for the
womanist, I feel its important to explain the historical context of the connection between black
women's identity/body and the community's institutional oppression.

How Oppressing the Black Woman's Body Means Oppressing the Community.

The black woman in America have for generations dealt with the racist oppression of her

5
femininity and body. In American history, the establishment of one's race in a space of social
supremacy means that it must be constructed in relation to an inferior "other". In constructing the
power in white identity there was a dehumanizing establishment of black identity. This meant
setting national identity and citizenship equal to that of a basic human identity. Equating a
feminine identity with white women aided in neutralizing the image of the white American
family dynamic1 while instilling the non- feminine "other" on Black women. American
institutions used the exploitation of physical labor to legally deny them rights to their own bodies
and sexuality (Higginbotham, 257). A method of exploiting the black female body was
appropriating the images of the 'Mammy' and the 'Jezebel.'
In Ar’n’t I A Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation South, Deborah Gray White
explores these two images as myths that were instituted into racial identities. The Jezebel myth
defines black women as sexual deviants who were “lewd and lascivious... [who]invited sexual
overtures from white men and that any resistance they displayed was mere feigning"(30). This
myth solidified the idea that black women lacked a intelligent sense of reasoning and control
when it comes to her body and her sexuality2 (Higginbotham, 263). The Jezebel in slavery was
used as a means to sexually dominate black women as well as institutionalize their rape. This
image also implies that because black women do not have a feminine sexual identity, they do not
possess the identity as a mother to her black children(263). White explains that image of the
Jezebel excluded black women from possessing the femininity identity of motherhood by
insinuating that black children were a result of animalistic breeding. She writes:
1

When I use the term 'American' here, I refer to the neutrality of the white American experience. The American
family versus the Black American family refers to white Americans automatically having an national identity.
The black American family on the other hand must establish an identity that excludes the the influence of
whiteness while remaining aware of their 'double consciousness.'
2
Higginbotham speaks on the division between white and black people as each represents a "scale of humanity."
Within this scale, racial identity is measured on "carnality as opposed to intellect and/or spirit; savagery as
opposed to civilization; deviance as opposed to normality; promiscuity as opposed to purity."(263)

6
The view that black women were exceptionally libidinous was nourished by
the conditions under which slave women lived and worked. The matter of
reproduction provides an excellent example. American slavery was dependent
on the natural increase of the slave population, and through the use of
innumerable incentives, planters made sure that slave women were
prolific...Major periodicals carried articles detailing optimal conditions under
which bonded women were known to reproduce, and the merits of a particular
“breeder” were often the topic of parlor or dinner table conversations. The fact
that something so personal and private became a matter of public discussion
prompted one ex-slave to declare that “[black] women wasn't nothing but cattle.”
(31)
There are a few things that can be taken from this passage. One is the obvious
exploitation and violence on black women to further instill a sense of racial supremacy. Another
is the relation of breeding to the perception of black family and feminine identity. The Jezebel is
not a feminine stereotype, it is an animalistic one. So if this is myth associated with black
women/ black mothers what does that say for black children? Black men have been emasculated
through separation, violence, and humiliation. The legal forbidding of marriage as well as many
cases of being forced to witness the rape of black women by slave masters imbedded the idea
that black children are not born they're bred. These images were instituted into the American
thought process, which explains why it was so imperative for black women to re-establish the
black family dynamic. Black women understood that establishing the family dynamic reclaimed
gender, nationality, humanity, and control of black American identity.
The Mammy is a myth of black women as domestic figures within a white home. The
same way the Jezebel looked to pose black women as extremely sexual and deviant, the Mammy
posed black women as asexual,unattractive women who had an inherit nature to care for children.
However, the Mammy's “caretaker” attributes were given to white children; “she was the premier
house servant and all others were here subordinate.(White, 47)” She had to display the utmost
dedication to her slave masters, making sure that the house and children reflected the perfect
white American family image; a family image that validates itself through the degradation of the

7
black family. The Mammy's main focus was the white family she served, which meant she was
on call 24/7 and therefore was only given an extremely limited time to raise her own children.
This maternal “love” was only permissible to white children, which set black children and the
black community as the other to this associated bond of family and community.
The images of both the Mammy and Jezebel carried on into the mainstream perceptions
of black community. Black women's gender in the turn of the 20th century was associated with
both the exoticism of black bodies and domesticity usually being the only option offered in the
workforce. The long exploitation of black women's bodies has effected the black community's
stereotypes. She had become the general symbol for black relationships and sexuality
(Higginbotham, 263)
The Black Woman's Fight Goes Beyond Any Movement
The history of African American female activism had existed long before the Black
Nationalist movement and long before the second wave of white Feminism. From the moment
of Slave Emancipation in 1863, black women had taken it upon themselves to establish the black
family. Slavery had instituted the displacement and degradation of black men as the role of
patriarch in the black family, while placing black women's matriarchal role in a white home
(switching out the name matriarch and replacing it with “mammy”). So at the time of the
emancipation, black women had traveled across the country looking to reunite with children
and/or spouses who were sold to reestablish the family dynamic (Thompson, 150). These black
women had understood that establishing the black family meant establishing the liberated
American and humane identity that was only associated with white Americans. From the 1890's
black women have created national groups to respond to the social and welfare demands of the
black community. The groundwork for these clubs often started from literary societies formed in

8
urban black communities ("NACW", 429). Clubs like the "National Association of Colored
Women", the "Colored Woman's League", and the "National Federation of African American
Woman" institutionalized the social and political traditions of black feminist activism. Its
important to realize that political activism for black women meant fight for social progress
within the black community. Education and hands on involvement in organizing protests and
boycotts insured that the community was equipped with the tools for successful actions. This
insured the community would be knowledgeable of national politics, and be able to pass that
knowledge down. Kalenda Eaton, author of Womanism, Literature and the Transformation of the
Black Community, writes:
What most historical studies of the era fail to acknowledge is the brevity by
women in grass roots organizations including the artistic work of black women
novelist. The focused organizing within the black community was a useful and
necessary undercurrent to the self – aggrandizement and political rhetoric which
became an unwelcome distraction to complex internal issues. (6)
Black women understood that internalized images of the black community in America were
constructed and controlled by white patriarchal institutions. This is why it was so important for
Black women to establish a black family dynamic; because fighting for family and community in
many ways meant raging a political, social, and economic war against white America and their
institutions that tried to legally prevent a black community.
Moreover Black Woman had understood that in order to establish a powerful black
community there needs to be an establishment of black men as head of household and a face of
political and economic power. This does not mean, however that black women thought to set a
gender caste upon themselves. While black women looked to re-establish black men as head of
the house hold and face of political exposure, it was done knowing that once black men had
received that space, any moves towards progress meant aiding in black women's liberation.

9
There was an acknowledgment that black women looked to help establish a black patriarchal
family dynamic because they were excluded from participating in their own family as well
(Horton, 454). As I said earlier, any image that would distinguish black women as a motherly
figure, that image was only tolerated if she applied it to caring for a white family. Therefore,
bringing black men into the forefront meant setting up that family dynamic that would socially
create a space for black women to be women in their own home. Before the Black Nationalist
Movement, black women who chose to take a behind the scenes approach respected it as a
choice to be closer with her community.
The Black Nationalist Movement and the Feminist Movement
In 1968 Larry Neal wrote “The Black Aesthetic” defining aesthetics of black literature
and culture as it stands to represent agendas of the Black Nationalist movement. Male writers
like him and Amiri Baraka mirrored Black Nationalist idea of woman's role in the movement. In
Baraka's essay "The Legacy of Malcolm X, and the Coming of the Black Nation" he states that
the only thing missing in the consciousness of the black community is for the "Black Man [to]
take control" (168). He expands on that statement in "State/meant," where he explains the role of
the artist with heavy male dominant indicators. He writes:
The Black Artist's role in America is to aid in the destruction of America as he
knows it. His role is to report and reflect the nature of the society and himself in
that society, that other men will be moved by the exactness of his rendering and,
if they are black men, grow strong through this moving (169)
Black women, who till now had been the matriarch in black community activism, had watched
Black Men take on the role as face and prime concern of the black community. The Black
Nationalist movement and the description of its literary aesthetics took the idea of reestablishing
black men as the patriarchal figure in family dynamics as a means to mandate black women to
take a silent role in the movement and appropriate that silence to the concerns of her identity as

10
black women. Black women during the Nationalist movement were told that their main concern
was to completely cater to the needs to black men, ensuring that that their black womanhood
would not emasculate the strong black male's image (Franklin, 435). Francis Beale3 was one of
the first to publicly criticize this aesthetic in her famous 1969 essay, "Double Jeopardy: To Be
Black and Female":
Since the advent of Black Power, the male had exerted a more prominent
leadership role in our struggle for justice in this country. He sees the system for
what it is for the most part, but where he rejects its values and mores on many
issues, when it comes to women, he seems to take his guidelines from the pages
of Ladies Home Journal. Black men are maintaining that they have been
castrated by society but that Black women somehow escape this persecution and
even contributed to the emasculation...If we are talking about building a strong
[Black] nation, capable of throwing off the yoke of capitalist oppression, then we
are talking about the total involvement of every man, woman, and child, each
with a highly developed political consciousness...those who are exerting their
'manhood' by telling black women to step back into a domestic, submissive role
are assuming a counter revolutionary position (92-93)
The error in the Black Arts and Black Nationalist movement was the idea that the fight
for the racial justice meant fighting exclusively for the racial liberation of black men. While
these misogynistic aesthetics of male leadership were being inherited into Black culture, it
enforced the necessity for women to reclaim their feminine identity in the fight for racial justice.
Moreover, this reclamation called on the need for black feminist literature and its critics.
Unfortunately while there wasn't a space within the Black Nationalist Movement for a
discourse on the oppression of black women, the Feminist Movement4 at the time equally
ignored issues of blackness in the fight of gender equality. The face of feminine oppression has
historically been a white woman's. The discussion of what it means to be liberated from gender

3

Francis Beale (b. 1940) is Black feminist and political peace activist. Her essay "Double Jeopardy: To Be Black and
Female" was published in the 1970 The Black Woman: An Anthology, anthology of black women writers, edited
by Toni Cade Bambara. This essay became the framework for many black feminist prose.
4
While this movement in the 60's- 70's is also coined as the Second Wave of Feminism,for the sake of this project it
will be referred to as the Feminist Movement.

11
roles in white and black communities were rarely discussed. Black women who had issues with
that were often chastised for not engaging in “solidarity” with white women when the correct
term should have been assimilation. In "Black Women: Shaping Feminist Theory", Bell Hooks
comments on the how feminist text like Betty Friedan's Feminine Mystique5 implies that the
feminine identity is exclusive to middle class white women, more specifically white housewives,
placing non- white or poor white women in the space of non existence. She writes:
Betty Friedan's The Feminist Mystique is still heralded as having paved the
way for the contemporary feminist movement – it was written as if these [nonwhite, non upper middle class, non married] women did not exist. Friedan's
famous phrase, “the problem that has no name,” often quoted to describe the
condition of women in this society, actually referred to the plight of a select
group of college-educated; middle and upper class, married white women –
housewives bored with leisure, with the home, with children, with buying
products, who wanted more out of life. Friedan concludes her first chapter by
stating: “We can no longer ignore that voice within women that says: 'I want
something more than my husband and my children and my house.'” That “more"
she defined as careers. She did not discuss who would be called in to take care of
the children and maintain the home if more women like herself were freed from
and given equal access with white men to the professions. (190)
The husband, kids and the image of the housewife are symbols of the “feminine”
(middle-upper class) identity. Hooks explains that the privilege that whiteness provides for the
feminine identity is the power of choice. These women, granted were suffering, but they have the
choice to explore the many facets of their life. According to Hooks, oppression is defined as an
“absence of choices." This feminist chooses to ignore the experiences of non-white women the
same way she chooses to ignore how they too look to appropriate identities and lack there of on
people of color to establish their social caste. Black women and working and lower class women
did not have the privilege to be bored with the confines of their home; these women were
working and supporting their family. Alice Walker, who coined the term womanist, argues its
5

Feminist Mystique, published February 19, 1963 by W.W. Norton and Co., is a nonfiction book written by Betty
Friedan. This book examined the unhappy lifestyles of the housewives of the 1950's and 1960's. Since its
publications it has been considered by many white feminist as a pioneering text in contemporary feminist studies.

12
either an inconvenience or “mind straining for white women scholars to think of black women
as women, perhaps because “woman” (like man among white males) is a name they are claiming
for themselves and themselves alone. Racism decrees that if they are now women...then black
women must, perforce, be something else" (qt. in Allan, 3). Also, while these feminists were
leaving the home to join the workforce, had any of these feminist stop to think of who would be
raising their children? No. That would mean addressing the issue that white women still look to
black women to raise their children. White feminist dismissed the black women's experience and
the social appropriation of their gender. Feminist and historian, Gerda Lerner makes a brilliant
statement about the neglect of the black woman's experience her 1979 book, The Majority Finds
its Past: Placing Women in History when she says, "Black women define their own “liberation”
as being free to take care of their own homes and their own children" (63).
The Rise of the Black Feminist Critique
In the late 70's Black feminist began receiving a larger voice and exposure within the
community and within the Eurocentric academy. These women understood that discussion on the
politics black liberation and women's rights were, in many ways, community based. The history
of black women centering their political protest in the community was tradition needed to be
respected as much as the traditions within the white suffragist movement. At this point black
women were seeking equality from the white home and then reestablishing the outlet for women
issues in the black home. Earlier black feminist groups like the Combative River Collective in
19746, issued statements that assured that black women who sought gender and racial freedom
do not seek liberation as a result of being anti-black male or anti- white women (Combahee
River Collective, 204). They sought liberation of their identity because fighting for a space in

6

Combahee River Collective was a Black feminist lesbian organization active in Boston from 1974 to 1980. One of
the founders, Barbara Smith, is considered one of the pioneers of the Black feminist critique.

13
which black women are respected socially and academically will enhance the fight against the
oppression of white patriarchy. Seeing as white patriarchal institutions in the United oppress both
the black and female community, black women represent the solidarity between these two social
issues and yet thier voices were aggressively being silenced or placed as lesser issue.
The faults of the Black Nationalist Movement did two things to help jump-start the
discourse on black feminism and its literature: (1) It failed to expose a space that allowed black
women to reclaim a voice, and criticized the black women looking to claim that space. Trying to
reclaim that voice socially during the height of the Black Nationalist Movement would be seen
as anti-black and therefore pro white women and pro-white. (2) The Black Nationalist movement
did provide a grounding for how literary critics and politics would help shape the image of social
liberation movements. The Black Arts movement provided a space for black literature (primarily
poetry) to be read as imperative and intellectual social critiques that demanded to be respected on
an academic level. Furthermore, the Black Arts and Black Nationalist movements felt that in the
case of literature and politics, to understand one means to understand the other. The Black
Nationalist Movement in many ways projected its message best through artist representation and
the Black Arts Movement defined its aesthetics around the fight for specific political agenda.
Both were done in attempts to socially uplift the image of blackness and black community as a
cultural, intellectual, social and political force that demanded recognition. Unfortunately, the idea
that community= black men, really regressed this plight. The late 70's allowed for black feminist
to define their own aesthetics as well as make the issue of embracing their womanhood and their
blackness synonymous factors in the fight for racial equality. Unfortunately discourse on black
feminist literature wouldn't serve as imperative in the social fight until the early eighties.
In 1983 Alice Walker, scholar, author, activist and intellectual, published In Search of

14
Our Mother's Garden. This book held a collection of essays that Walker defined as "Womanist
prose." In the first page of this book she introduced this famous and influential; womanist is
defined as a "black feminist or feminist of color" who "loves women" and sometimes "loves
individual men [both genders "sexually and nonsexually']." She is "[c]omitted to the survival and
wholeness of entire people, male or female." A womanist is also "traditionally universalist, 7"
and reflects on the traditional history of black women as leaders of her community (83). Critic
Farah Griffin categorizes the definition of the Womanist critique into three particular task in her
essay "That the Mothers May Soar and the Daughters May Know Their Names: A Retrospective
of Black Feminist Literary Criticism." She states:
The first of these tasks was archeological: In order to construct a tradition
that led to the contemporary writers such as Morrison and Walker, critics
charged themselves with locating, teaching,and writing about earlier “lost”
works by African American woman. Second they created a critical
vocabulary and framework for discussing works by African American
women. Third they theorized that body of work as well as the critical practices
of black feminist critics. The boundaries between these tasks are porous and
flexible. (488)
I believe with the need to incorporate the womanist discourse into the academy, many
contemporary critics of Black womanist poetry, saw these tasks as meaning that its only the critic
who can form a vocabulary of social critique. Furthermore, the only use of this specific literature
is to locate literary traditions that could aid in a formal Black feminist text. This, I believe, is
because the poetry wasn't a formal essay.
From the late 80's to early 90's, Black feminist literary critics defined formal womanist
text in accordance to three factors: the targeted audience, its need to be prose and, the academic

7

Walker clarifies that this universalist still means being social conscious of her race and gender. She writes,
"Traditionally universalist, as in: "Mama, why are we brown pink, and yellow, and our cousins are white beige
and black?" Ans.: "Well, you know the colored race is just like a flower garden, with every color flower
represented." Traditionally capable, as in "Mama, I'm walking to Canada and I'm taking you and a bunch of other
slaves with me." Reply: "It wouldn't be the first time"" (xi)

15
background of the writer. These three factors create an intense class divide in the definition of a
womanist critique. Since womanist are committed to the welfare of black people and its activism
is based in the black community, excluding literature that doesn't have a specific academic
background or academic audience in mind, alludes that all others in the black community are not
adequate to partake in this separatist discussion. This continues the idea that the black woman is
society's "other." These critics should instead be looking to discuss how womanist writers reflect
the intellectual social criticisms of the community in the language that encouraged all who lived
in the community to actually participate in it. Ann duCille, who was one of the first black
feminist literary critics responded to her contemporaries by asking “why have we – black
women- become the subjected subjects of so much contemporary scholarly investigation, the
peasants under glass of intellectual inquiry in the 1990s?” (qt. in Griffin, 483)
These critics fail to realize that black writers of the 70's had the expressed the intellectual
social criticisms and formats of womanist activism in their poetry and poetic process. There is a
lack of respect in acknowledging the amazing balance womanist poets did of maintaining the
socio- political agenda with the many classic literary traditions. Thus giving the black
community a space within American identity and the literary academe.
From reading Gwendolyn Brooks, Lucille Clifton and Nikki Giovanni (along with black
feminist and womanist critiques) I believe some of what makes a piece of literature womanist is:
(1)The poet's maintenance of the Walkers definition. (2)The poets articulation of the process by
which she transfers the womanist ideologies into a poem. (3) This poem reveals the aesthetics
that define her as a black female poet while invoking the black community's involvement socially and ideologically. As a womanist is a black feminist, (4)her work looks to provide a
critique on the black community. Finally, (5) she acknowledges and exposes the community's

16
intellectual discourses to the academy and to the community itself.
I chose Gwendolyn Brooks because I wanted to illustrate that while there are black
women who have major acclaim in the literary world that does not mean that they have had a
designated space in literary history to showcase how these women created a socio- political
movement. Brooks is Poet Laurent and Nobel Prize winner and while her acclaim transcends
race and gender in many ways, her monumental achievements as a classic poet should not
overshadow the monumental achievements she's made laying the groundwork for the womanist
aesthetic. Specifically, through her community work that reinstated the importance of black
woman's participation in community based activism. Brooks was inspired by men of the Black
Nationalist Movement but that did mean she would define herself or her efforts secondary to a
man. She, like the many socially active black women before her, looked to education and
volunteering to help enact social change. She allowed her poetry to act as a mediator between the
black community and the academy. Her collection of poetry in Beckonings (1975) contains
womanist critiques by writing with a voice that embodies the legacy of black American women
as powerful figures who have always looked to uplift the black community and engage the
discourse of the community's progress and involvement. Through her poetry, Brooks reminds
readers that the black American community is a staple in defining what it means to have an
American identity. Her poetry illustrates the intellectual, political and psychoanalytic
complexities of the black American experience.
In the case of Lucille Clifton, who is also a Poet Laurent, I was most interested in how
she describes her poetic process; how she confronts and writes her poetry, especially an
interview published in the Callaloo8 Journal. Black literature tends to look to define the cultural

8

Calaloo is an academic quarterly founded in 1976 to provide a publication outlet, in English or English translations,
for new, emerging, and established creative writers who produce texts in different languages in the African

17
aesthetics of the current political movement. Therefore, its important to understand the thought
process of a womanist. Particularly Clifton's womanist critique on the black woman and double
consciousness. In “All the Things You Could Be by Now if Sigmund Freud's Wife Was Your
Mother,” -an extremely influential critique of Black Feminist and Womanist literature- Hortense
Spiller argues that the psychoanalytic process that black womanist go through “leads to “greater
self consciousness, a self-critical capacity in your relationship to others" (qt. in Griffin 496). In
other words, Spillers acknowledged the womanist's “distinction between 'one' and the
'individual'”(Griffin, 469) and how that relates to a black woman's objectivity and subjectivity of
race, gender and community. This process of distinguishing the “one” and the “individual” is
almost identical to how Lucille Clifton describes her poetic process. While Clifton never
formally identified herself as a member of the Black Arts Movement, she explains that
consciously existing in the black experience, looking to better improve the circumstances that
one is socially oppressed by is automatically a political decision. What also makes her approach
to her poetry womanist is her belief that she is automatically of the black community, that there
is not limit to what defines a black person and what defines an intellectual or an activist. Clifton
also realizes that social progression and social liberation of the black community depends on the
communities interest of the social progression and liberation of the black female.
What interests me about Nikki Giovanni is how her critiques in interview and work of
poetry actually incorporate the contemporary discoveries that black feminist critics have made
concerning the womanist literary tradition in the last 8- 10 years. I felt like her poetic styling and
social critiques in My House (1972) mesh the original womanist ideologies with the popular
contemporary approaches. Giovanni mirrors the early missions of womanist writers with her
Diaspora; and to serve as a forum for literary and cultural critics who write about the literature and culture of the
African Diaspora.

18
investment to the liberation for all black people. She acknowledges that fight against racial
oppression as a black women is something she shares with her entire black community. She then
expands into contemporary by incorporating the womanist psychoanalytic approach on the
significance of space, and the necessity of it for her liberation as black person and as a woman.
Her poetry establishes a brilliant critique on the cultural symbol the black woman's body has
become- its oppression, its reclamation and its use in the contemporary literary traditions of
womanist text. Her poetry and interviews also give insight into the critique of the white feminist
movement, thus illustrating even more that black women needed to formulate a space to engage a
discourse on their experience. Giovanni's poetry and interviews showcase that the inclusion of
the black community is pivotal in any intellectual and/or academic study of American literature
and history. Yet her language is not elitist nor does it look down on the black community. She
merely showcases that the black community has always engaged in discussions defining,
critiquing and redefining black intellectual thought and identity.
For my conclusion I would like to briefly explore what came from this emerging
womanist critique. Using Sonia Sanchez, I look to finish this project discussing how the
womanist critique lead to the Africana Womanist movement. The space established by the
womanist allowed for the Africana womanist to become more separatist in her ideologies. The
Africana Womanist offers critiques as to why she is so "unlike" the black feminist and womanist
before her, grounding her aesthetics in the emerging Afrocentrism movement.

19

Chapter One
Reviving "Love" and Motherhood: The Black Nationalist Critique
in Gwendolyn Brooks's Beckonings
Alice Walker considers Brooks one of the few womanist writers who had been accepted
into the study of American literature9. Through her writing and her involvements in community
based activism, Brooks showed how black women writers (poets specifically) used the exposure
of black womanhood as a means of bringing about progression in the black community. What
interests me about Gwendolyn Brooks is that even though she participated in the Black Arts and
National movements, that involvement did not counteract with how her writings exercised a

9

Walker references Brooks in "The Unglamorous but Worthwhile Duties of the Black Revolutionary Artist, or of the
Black Writer who Simply Works and Writes," "Zora Neale Hurston: A Cautionary Tale and a Partisan View" as well
as "A Talk:Convocation."

20
black feminist critique. While she defined herself as proactive in the black arts movement, she
rejected the ideal role of a prototypical female ally. This prototypical ally of the movement relies
on the the role of the black woman to be silent and 'male liberation' oriented. The idea of “stand
by your man” in the Black Nationalist movement instilled the caste of black American women as
second class amongst second class. The error in the Black Arts and Black Nationalist movement
was the idea that the fight for the racial justice meant fighting exclusively for the racial liberation
of black men. While these misogynistic aesthetics of male leadership were being inherited into
Black culture, it enforced the necessity for women to reclaim their feminine identity in the fight
for racial justice. Writers like Brooks, used their creative writing to lay the foundation of what
would be later be used in forming the Womanist and Black Feminist movements (Griffin, 485).
Gwendolyn Brooks was born on July 17, 1917 in Topeka Kansas. The daughter of David
and Keziah-Wims Brooks, Gwendolyn Brooks was raised on the principles of education, family
and creativity. Her mother was the first person to introduce her to world of poetry when at 16
Keziah had taken her to meet Langston Hughes and James Weldon Johnson. On the spot
Gwendolyn Brooks had read Hughes his poetry and she remained in brief correspondence with
Johnson when she had sent the civil rights leader and author samples of her writings. From this
moment, Brooks reflected the bond between family, poetry and politics in the African-American
community. Her father, David Brooks, was born to both former slaves Lucas and Elizabeth
Brooks. David Brooks, with his twelve brothers and sisters would be later raised in Oklahoma
City. Though they lived in extreme modest settings, his parents opened their home to hungry and
homeless, providing free meals and temporary shelter. When Lucas Brooks died in the 1890's,
David Brooks became the head of the household, ingraining the importance of education.
Unfortunately it would only be David who would graduate from High School. In the summer of

21
1914, David Brooks met Keziah Wims, a pianist and 5thgrade school teacher who attended
Emporia College, the two married in July of 1916. After the birth of their second born, Raymond
Brooks, the family continually moved around Chicago until the Brook's family were able to buy
a home in the suburbs of Chicago's South Side.
Gwendolyn Brooks's work ranges from critiquing the “goings on” within the black urban
community, girlhood and boyhood, and her reflections on love, sexuality and relationship. What
makes all of these approaches in her poetry supportive in her political movements is the strong
appearance of her voice, as a black female, in each one. When writing about black men for
example, she does not write objectively nor does she act as a voice for the black male community.
She includes her identity as a woman with the intent of showcasing the inclusive approach to
seeking liberation from racial oppression. She involved herself in the political dialogue of black
men because it is a part of the race dialogue which involves the black community and therefore
deems the need for a black womanist perspective. In a 1971 interview conducted by Ida Lewis
entitled “My People Are Black,” Brooks talks about how she was “turned on to the black
revolution” when she and Margaret Danner watched Amiri Baraka (then Leroi Jones) and Ron
Miller inspired such enthusiasm at a Black Writers Conference at Fisk University (54). She had
gotten involved in teaching a weekly creative writing workshop for young men who were
involved in gang violence in Chicago.
Brooks saw herself as a community leader, not a male ego booster. She facilitated these
workshops with the tools she gained from her experience as a black female poet. Her focus was
to use education as a tool to equip the progressive future of the black community (as a whole).
Teaching was a common way black women became involved in the fight for black liberation.
However, in the Black Nationalist Movement, teaching became appropriated as secondary to the

22
approaches of black male leadership (Barnett, 164). In "Invisible Southern Black Women
Leaders of the Civil Rights Movement," Barnice Barnett explains how the constraints of race,
class and gender has effected both the marginality of black women's involvement in black
liberation movement as well as the scholarship of leaders of the movement (163). Most scholars
primarily study the effects ministry had on community based activism, which puts a male face to
role of leadership. Black female leadership were bombarded with "a negative problem-oriented
image that stereo- typically connects Black women with various "pathologies" within the family
such as female-headedness, illegitimacy, teen pregnancy, poverty, and welfarism the category of
leadership roles of community activism" (Barnett, 164). The "pathologies" effect the image of
the black American family lead black women to seek spaces in the liberation movement that
removed their negative images as well as aid in re-constructing the image of black community
and solidarity. Education and women working in the church had been equated with a position of
following their black charismatic sermonic male leaders. However these women were not
followers, those positions allowed black women to have a hands on role of organizing the
movements in which black men could establish themselves as the patriarchal support of the black
community. An example of this was JoAnn Robinson, an English Professor at Albany State
University. She and her black female colleagues of the "Woman's Political Council" organized
the Montgomery Boycott (Barnett, 169). Educators like Daisy Bates and Ellie Barker used their
roles as teachers to educate young college students on how to organize and execute successful
ways of protest. At the same time fellow teachers Septima Clark, Bernice Robinson and Dorothy
Cotton set up teaching programs to teach older black Americans how to read and write, as a
means to increase the amount of qualified registered voters (169). It is also important to realize
that many women took their leadership roles behind the camera because racism and sexism

23
limited the occupations allowed to black women. During the 50's and 60's education and
domestic work in white homes were usually the only places that accepted black women's
employment(Barnett,174). Many black female educators involved in the black liberation
movement were public school teachers; it was critical that they did not bring attention to their
actions since their positions were usually managed by racist heads of the educational system
(Barnett, 175). These women were using their school's equipment to print anti-racism leaflets
and hold meetings to organize protests. It was more important to these women to educate the
community and create social progress then it was to have their names cited or their faces
photographed. The misogyny in the Black Nationalist movement used "behind the scenes"
leadership to neglect the oppressive issues that the women of the community faced. Black female
educators were demonstrating how their positions gave them their ability to work out and
around the social and economic constraints of their black womanhood; therefore allowing them
to work closer and harder for the black community.
Brooks however was not a "silent heroin" in the Black Arts Movement. Brooks's fame as
a poet made her the exception to the black women poets who's work was not considered
deserving enough to be critiqued in the European academe. However, I believe her critics have
often ignored her response to effects the Black Nationalist movement had on silencing the
importance black women's issues and their involvements. This is not to say that her work is
purely written to demonstrate her political agenda. Her poetry continues the stylistic traditions of
American poetry. Brooks's poetry during the Black Nationalist Movement reclaims the
community's national identity by invoking the voice of black women to articulate the social
status of the black community. All of these things worked to establish a space to creatively
explore the identity of black womanhood and community and responded to the male dominant

24
constraints of the Black Nationalist and Black Arts movements. Alice Walker claims that what
makes womanist's literature is the writer's expression of "emotional flexibility," her wanting to
"know more and in greater depth than is considered "good" for one" (xi). Her work shows the
commitment to the bettering of the community as a whole, as well as the "traditionally
universalist" approach on her poetic voice (Walker, xi). At the same time, her poems are highly
instructive Black Feminist critiques - which is important because the first definitions of a
womanist is that she is a Black Feminist.
Gwendolyn Brook's book of poetry Beckonings (1975) has a variety of protagonist all
showcasing the community's diverse identities. That portrait of diverse voices continue the
"Whitman-esque" tradition of constructing the American identity by inserting herself in all of
faces of America (Greasley, 17). This insertion aids in including the black community in the
group of what defines an American nationality. Brook's approach to poetry best exemplifies
Kelenda Eaton's theoretical framework of womanist literature: This means that the work must
showcase “prioritizing strength, survival, unity and health(mental and physical) by first
addressing the needs and concerns of the existing poor and working class, as they define these
needs [...as well as] resist[ing] reliance on singular leadership as the method by which members
of the black community understand their roles in the political process"(8). Brooks in Eaton's eyes
created writings that could be included in the revolutionary movement without the comprising
the issues of gender and community. Brooks first poem in this collection, “The Boy Died In My
Ally,” does just that. It is also critical of her inaction; she accuses herself of not acknowledging
the experience of black men's racial injustice as part of her experience as a black woman. She
writes:
The Boy died in my alley
without my Having Known

25
Policeman said, next morning,
“Apparently, died Alone.” (lines 1-4)
Notice that she capitalized B, giving this person a name and a sense of importance when society
usually places the death of black men in the jargon of obscurity and irrelevance. In other words,
"Boy” gives a name to the black community, removing its existence from the obscurity of the
"other.". This is not to be confused with giving a gender to the community. The use of “The Boy”
in the stanza has no indicators that it has a specific gender, which suggest that that the victim in
the black community is not a specific gender. “The Boy” can also act as a metaphor for the
subjectivity of the black body. "Boy" responds to how the black physique has been stereotyped
as a symbol of black people's instinctual and animalistic prone to violence. To properly call
someone a 'Boy' means that their formal title is based child-like or less developed distinctions.
Furthermore, his death instills that image because it suggests he engaged in some act of violence
that lead to it. "Having Known" can also be a proper noun, a title of significance to "The Boy."
The line talks about how "The Boy" died without Brook's actual "Having Known." Seeing as
many of the constructed images black community have been establish through symbol of the
black body, Brooks might be showing that consciousness must be seen as a specific thing that
works in relation to the symbol of the black body. In other words, if the identity of the
community is seen as physical space then the space of consciousness takes up a physical space as
well. The black community needs to know what is going on in our spaces, even our alleyway.
This is not to suggest that the black community isn't aware of the violence that exist in the inner
city, Brooks is holding every person in the community accountable to themselves and to each
other. This accountability is an example of the social consciousness associated with political
activism. The policeman not being aware of a crime until the next day reflects how institutions of
law and order in America do not prioritize the well beings of black Americans. Thus the

26
policeman shows no care to know who this 'Boy' was. In fact, the policeman in the poem seems
to be more interested in him being dead rather than who he is. Which is why its even more
crucial to Brooks that the black community needs to be accountable for their health and their
identity.
The fourth line continues the use of capitalization in common nouns: “Apparently, died
Alone.” While the capitalizing of the word 'apparently' could be just the grammatical respect of
quotations, one could say that this capital 'A' would suggest that knowledge and awareness of the
goings on in the community is majorly important in the shaping of racial justice, especially since
the power of ignorance and suggestion define the black community to those looking in (hence
the policeman). Having something “appear” a certain way obviously means that your basing a
judgment what you see but not fully know. This “Boy,” who apparently has no name, according
to the police man “[a]pparently died alone." One can ask what does it mean to die alone? Brooks
capitalized “Alone” which mean that 'alone' could represent a person or place. Either way 'Boy' while she and the policeman consciously might not know- is of family and community, therefore
he was not truly alone. Brooks then writes:
“You heard a shot?” Policeman said.
Shots I hear and Shots I hear.
I never see the Dead. (line 5-7)
Its important to close read the 7th line in accordance with the first four. While she heard shots,
she “never” sees the dead. Yet again Brooks is formalizing and naming the unknown. Her never
seeing the dead means she doesn't see the lives associated with the dead. Its as if at the moment
of death, they are forgotten to her, Brooks might be critiquing the community blind eye to death.
Since the poem is being read as a womanist text, this lens is both singular and plural.
Brooks sees and responds to her involvement in the death of the Boy as a black woman and as an

27
un-gendered, non-singular member of the community. The community aided in creating her
perspective. Eaton argues that maintenance of the female experience is what honors the
womanist perspective in African American political and social culture (9). Notice the repetition
of “shots I hear.” When she says, “shots I hear and shots I hear,” the use of “and” might suggests
that there are two different shots. It is suggested that because the cop's presence is introduced in
this particular stanza, the two shots could refer to what is fired in the community and shots fired
by the “other10.” The speaker then goes on to distinguish the particular gunshot saying, “the shot
that killed him yes I heard/as I heard a thousand times before;/[...]across my years and arteries”
(lines 9,10,12). She speaks on her accumulating the sounds of shot with age, and the image of
shots running down arteries is Brooks showcasing her emotional attachment to the community.
One could say that it is her womanhood, her experience as a woman throughout the years and
witnessing the crime in the community that has sealed her bond with it. This is not to perpetuate
the image that women's responses to society are overly “emotional” in relation to men's
“rationality” and “pragmatism." This connection of Boy's death to her heart ("arteries") suggests
a physical maternal connection. This metaphor is brilliantly illustrated in the 5th stanza:
I have known this Boy before.
I have known this boy before, who ornaments my alley.
I never saw his face at all
I never saw his futurefall.
But I have known this Boy. (lines 17- 21)
The first two lines of stanza 5 begin with “ I have known this Boy before.” The
10

The “other” in this case refers to a combination of the racial and authoritative others. The police officer is a symbol
of the power of instituting supremacy with the intent of preserving whiteness as a social, political and economic
power. When surveying Race Critical Theory, whether it be my means of literature, feminism, history, sociology ,
its important to address the significance of the “other.” When discussing the “other” in American norms, that
usually means non- white/of- color/black/socially inferior. When the experience of race is seen through the lens
of the black community the “other” can refer to how the community deals with living with the Dubiosian
“double veil” of knowing that they are and must act as the “other” when encountering whiteness. It can also be
used to describe the white community when the black community is viewed as a natural and safe space. This is
how Brooks describes the policeman as the “other.” The Black community is neutral to blacks because the
community is is the space where they are socially the 'norm'.

28
repetition in this case is the speaker developing context and connection with the man who died in
her alley. The repetition of alley (“your alley” “my alley”) signifies her personal space, and the
significance of it being shared with the Boy. Walker mentions that a womanist "loves individual
men, sexually and/or non sexually"(xi). The death of 'Boy' that she knows but doesn't see, the
image of him 'ornamenting' her alley as well as how the death effects her heart, creates an image
of still birth, where her alley is a metaphor for the birth canal. When Brooks says she knows
'Boy' she knows the person in relation to a space in her 'alley,' while "ornament" is a symbol of
celebration. She knows Boy but not his face, which also suggests that her alley is a space to
produce the Boy, and her unknowing of his "futurefall" illustrates the surprise of a still birth.
This aids in illustrating the pain she feels of her body's responsibility and her not having control
of the situation. She finally sees the 'Boy' as a symbol of light/life ("ornament") in her alley when
he dies.
I want to explore the metaphor of still birth in the poem stylistically as a well as exploring
the deeper complexities of Brook's womanist voice. In the first stanza Brooks first introduces the
image of still birth in the lines "Policeman said, next morning,/"Apparently died Alone,"" (lines
3-4) I had stated that the police man creates assumptions of the state of the community through
an established distance of time ("next morning"). What can also be taken from this line is the
assumptions of black motherhood and black children. The capitalization of "Alone" is a location
outside of Brooks's birth canal which suggest the the policeman (who symbolizes whiteness as a
position of power, institution, and oppression) has generated an image of the community that
lacks the image of a black mother. Brook's comments on how her literature means to rebut this
external perception of community and black life in a interview where she states, "[t]he prevailing
understanding[of the poetic voice]: black literature is literature BY blacks, ABOUT blacks,

29
directed TO blacks... Black life is different from white life. Different in 'nitty gritty' Different
from birth, Different at death" (qt. in Greasely, pg 20). In the fourth stanza the policeman
interrogates Brooks in the death of Boy stating "A Boy is dying in your ally/A boy has died, and
in your alley/ And Have you known this boy before." 'Boy' has been changed to 'A Boy' which
suggests he sees Boy as an undefined isolated being. Brooks had the policeman then divides the
death of the boy and the location of her alley with a comma and an "and". This suggests that
policeman can objectively visualize the death of a boy in the space of a woman, but image of
black women giving birth to black children cannot be conceptualized. The process of giving birth
and the pain of a mother losing life through still birth are instances that depict situations in a
universal image of family. Including blacks in the universal image means that they are not the
"other" to normal (white) family dynamics.
Brooks recalls hearing the "Shot" that killed the Boy. I began to wonder if the Shot
should be read as an object of death other than a gunshot. The "Shot" and the "Thousand" heard
before can refer to the to the many social setbacks of the new generations in the black
community. However, what caught my attention about the word shot was how she heard it the
shots "careening tinnily down the night/ and across my years and arteries." A shot 'careening
tinnily' literally translates to tilting cheap thin metal, while "down the night" and a moving across
arteries illustrates this shot being injected into a space of darkness and sleep by the ways of
arteries. This is an image of heroin use. Heroin itself is an example of both death in the
community and death that transfers between a woman and her unborn child. Whether Brooks, in
the poem, is literally injecting heroin or not is uncertain; what is certain is that the imagery of
passing symbols of poison down equates a "still born" death of a future generation.
In the next stanza, Brooks aggressively charges herself with the crime. The repetition of

30
the word "I" reconstructs the space of the poets voice from victim to willing participant. She
writes:
I have always heard him deal with death.
I have always heard the shout, the volley.
I have closed my heart-ears late and early.
And I have killed him ever.
I joined the Wild and killed him
with knowledgeable unknowing
I saw where he was going
I saw him Crossed. And seeing,
I did not take him down. (lines 22 -30)
The multiple use of the 'I' is Brook's voice of consciousness concerning her participation of this
killing. The 'I' exists in spaces of sensory imagery; one always hears and sees thing, but is the
conscious "I" actually defined by the senses? Brooks closed “heart-ears” is her denial of her
senses (eyes, ears). She admits that while she heard his encounters with death and she had heard
the many sounds of crime, she silenced herself to it. Notice that she draws another connection
between the heart and sound. She said that she had felt connected to the crime in the community,
(stanza 3) yet she closed herself off to the man involved. Brooks is critiquing how we see crime
in relation to black men. The speaker is effected by death in the community, but not by what
caused these deaths. Its very easy to speak on violence within the black community, but to speak
on what leads a black man to life of violence - to be killed in his neighborhood - would mean
speaking on one's personal involvement or disregard for the black American community in the
inner city. She then says that she “killed him ever” which means her neglect and her closed offness to is what lead him to death. Brooks, in the poem, is unable to see that she effects him as he
effects her (shown the mother/child image of the still birth).
That idea really pushes what Gwendolyn Brooks tries to convey in her poetry and in her
hands on activism. Both black men and black women need to see how fighting for each others

31
rights means fighting for themselves. Its as if she decided to complete Baraka's statement about
black women. Black women shouldn't focus of on the black male instead of herself. She should
fight for her liberation and her community/black men, and her male counterpart should do the
same. Black women are responsible for reestablishing the family dynamic in the black
community post slavery, and to Brooks, a woman turning her back to the legacy of maintaining
that family and that community is as detrimental as killing 'Boy' in the alley. Black women
activist supported black men's progress for the purpose of re-establishing the black family
dynamic and community post slavery. If the alley is a metaphor for the birth canal, then 'Boy' is a
symbol for the progress of the black family, black youth, and black men. Boy is created through
the support and shelter of the woman's alley, its death as a still born suggest a critique on the
isolation of black women. Women who were active without recognition were having these roles
marginalized into being expected to keep a silent tongue, yet do whatever is told of them. While
this isn’t what most black women involved in the revolution did, it was image associated with
them. In reality these women began bringing the womanist critique and literature into a more
intellectual discourse.
In the eighth stanza she says how she heard Boy cry for his father mother brother and
sister:
He cried not only "Father!"
but "Mother!
Sister!
Brother."
The cry climbed up the alley.
It went up to the wind.
It hung upon the heaven
for a long
stretch-strain of Moment. (lines 31 - 39)
She suggest how it was expected of 'Boy' to call on the patriarch but for him to call for family

32
rather than for an alpha male is what made the “cry...[hang] upon the heaven/for a long/stretch strain of Moment.” The cry for aid- aid from all aspects of the black community- holds
monument for Brooks. In this stanza, calling for the community means calling for a spiritual
guidance, illustrating that even calling for guidance for a moment is monumental (hence the
capitalization of “Moment”).
The ninth stanza only contains two lines putting all focus on the haunting image of the
remnants of the alley. She writes, "[t]red floor of my alley/is a special speech to me" (lines 4041). The minimal lines in the stanza returns the reader to how personal the space of "alley" is to
Brooks. The tragedy of the still birth, even with social and external imagery, is an experience of
confronting death that only a mother can fully understand. The color "red" paints the image of
the birth canal and of the 'blood shed' a (black) mother, sacrifices in the attempts to give birth
(birth to a child and birth to the community). One could say that stating that this personal and
internal space of motherhood is a "special speech" showcases how voicing black womanhood is
equal to the sermonic power and presence associated with male ministry in the black community.
In "Heralding the Clear Obscure: Gwendolyn Brooks and the Apostrophe," Lesley Wheeler
claims that Brooks use of the "voice of the mother and its metaphoric extension into the voice of
the minister enables her to investigate whether or not...the lyric has a social function" (229).
Brooks use of poetry to reclaim the ministerial voice that is usually male is an efforts to reclaim
the voice of black womanhood. We see the effect of the female minister arise more in "Black
Wedding Song" as Wheeler claims "the voices of the mother and the preacher fuse, public and
private worlds and their separate discourse become indistinguishable" (234).
“A Black Wedding Song” expresses how Brooks views the value of marriage in the black
community. She uses 'love' as metaphor to critique the irony in a male dominant ideology of

33
black solidarity. While the failure of integration was evident, it resulted into the more aggressive
pursuits of the Black Nationalist movement. The antithesis to the Black Nationalist aesthetic was
the idea that the black community was a symbol of social regression and the black woman was
face of this failure. Black American men have constantly been held as the antithesis of the
“prototypical” American white man. Their manhood has been subjected to degradation since the
antebellum period. Integration posed the opportunity for black men to assimilate not only into
white culture but into white manhood. After the Loving vs. Virginia ruling in 196711, some black
men saw interracial marriage as the way to showcase their “manhood” since white women in
America have been seen as the symbol of racial citizenship (in opposition to the black
community). Marrying and living in the epicenter of whiteness along with having half-white
children, showcased ones ability to be partnered with whiteness and attain a sense of national
identity. One has to ask how did this way of thinking effect the image of black woman in creating
the ultimate American family? Black Americans as a whole are rarely credited with national
identity and black women have been seen as second class within the second class. Up to this
point, establishing a black family dynamic was crucial in order for a black men to achieve the
“American Dream." Now black women, in terms of family dynamics, were second rate. If
marrying white women is a symbol of racial supremacy, then marrying black women symbolized
racial inferiority and social defeat. Interracial marriage used for pseudo social climbing further
instilled that black women cannot possess a positive feminine identity, especially since they were
not even seen as necessary within their own community.
Gwendolyn Brook wrote “A Black Wedding Song” as a dedication to three black
11

Loving v. Virginia (1967) was a landmark case in which the United States Supreme Court declared Virginia's
"Racial Integrity Act of 1924", unconstitutional, thereby overturning Pace vs. Alabama (1883) and ending racebased legal restrictions on marriage in the United States.

34
marriages. This puts attention on the many forms of black love while showcasing the relevance
and power in these unions:
This love is a rich cry over
The deviltries and the death.
A weapon-song. Keep it strong.
Keep it strong.
Keep it logic and Magic and lightening and Muscle. (lines 1 -5)
These two stanzas show that Brooks looks to express the power of black marriages as well as use
its imagery to signify the 'marriage' between the aesthetic and the political voice of the womanist
poet. The literal definition of love as “a rich cry over/ the deviltries and death” is an
illustration of a force powerful enough to overpower the effects of death and evil. Brooks
invokes the voice of the minister because the black church has been the base for many political
and social movements in the black community; it was black women who constructed and
organized this space. There is also a re-construction of literary tradition in these lines. Brooks
uses "Love" to indicate ironic coexistence. "This Love" ('this' indicates that its a type of 'love'
different from before) is defined by the stanza. A "rich cry" is a modern and more direct use of
what critics define as her Dickinsonian poetic style used in her earlier work. Yemisi Jimoh best
describes this style- in "Double Consciousness, Modernism, and Womanist Themes in
Gwendolyn Brooks's "The Anniad""- as using "noble and heaven -focus language" then
transforming the "form, punctuation and line rhythms" with irony as a resistance to gender roles.
(168). Instead of using coded noble terms she uses the word "rich." Yet 'cry' suggest
vulnerability, a trait not traditionally noble. The marriage of the two however, does defeat the
"deviltries and death" which I believe refers to Eurocentric and colonial aesthetics control of the
black female voice. Jimoh states that "through mastery of form, African American writers [like
Brooks] create a space for their own voices. This space simultaneously critiques European

35
American models and speaks for itself" (176). Black marriage is metaphor for the Black
community using the Eurocentric traditions of the Church (an example of institutions that have
oppressed black people) to create a space for constructing traditions for the black community by
the community themselves. Whiteness used marriage in America as a symbol of racial hierarchy
and dehumanizing black slaves by not recognizing black unions. However, black marriage is
now a tool of black power, hence 'This Love' is a "weapon song." Notice in the 5th line how
Brooks uses letter and capitalization patterns of 'l' and "M": "Keep it logic and Magic and
lightening and Muscle." The pattern suggests a vocal inflection that gives the poem the sound of
a sermon. As mentioned earlier, this assertion of woman's voice into the sermon makes the voice
of impact on the black community indistinguishable to a gender(Wheeler, 234). She then writes:
Strong hand in strong hand, stride to
the Assaults that is promised you (lines 6-7)
The union of two strong hands means that a black marriage is a union in the community as a
whole. There is no gender specifics, only strength, because what a black marriage represents
outside of the two's union is a joining of black people; it represents commitment and solidarity.
When Brooks continues on to say that they must “stride to the Assaults that is promised...”she is
calling out the activism embedded in everyday decisions made in the black community. With all
the assaults made on black gender, sexuality and family, the idea that two black people see past
those images and ideologies and want to be united in the support growth of the other is not just a
step in a relationship but a proactive course. It exposes black power as an ideology that shapes
how black people carry on in relation to each other. According to Brooks black love is a political
movement towards Black liberation. This expanded definition of 'love' reminds me of how
Walker uses the word 'love' to describe her 3rd definition of a womanist. She states that a
womanist, "[l]oves music. Loves dance. Loves the moon. Loves the Spirit. Loves love and food

36
an roundness. Loves struggle. Loves the Folk. Loves herself. Regardless" (xii).
Part 2 of this poem explores more on the ironic metaphor of "Love" for the black
community and the poetic voice. Brooks uses that irony to stage a tension (marriage) between the
Euro-centric lyrical aesthetics and the direct black national utilitarian voice. She writes:
For you
I wish the kindness that romps or sorrows along.
Or kneels.
I wish you the daily forgiveness of each other.
For war comes in from the World
and puzzles a darling duettangles tongues,
tears hearts, mashes minds;
there will be the need to forgive. (lines 12 - 20)
The marriage between the aesthetic and the utilitarian reflects what Jimoh states is the "double
conscious sister in the veil"(169). In the Womanist tradition, Brooks mirrors the health and
progress of the Black community with health and progress of the black women. The communal
black health along with her poetic health helps expose a lens onto the progress inside the black
community and black community's progress in a white society. For Black Marriage, which is
indicated in the "for you", Brooks wishes them to be aware of 'Love', as it is both a testament to
the community as as well as a racial term that help institute them as the "other." "Kindness that
romps or sorrows along" contains oxy-moronic verbs to define the kindness of 'this love'. She
wishes them both forms of Kindness because being aware of the self-defined and what defined
from oppressors is important for the survival of the black family. As Jimoh states, "Brooks uses
oxymoronic contrasts of beauty and decay to describe [the protagonist] and to describe her
relationship to the [allusions] in the beacon of democracy" (180).
The forgiveness of each other might refer to the forgiveness between Brooks two poetic
voices. Brooks's critics tend to see her voices in opposition of each other. For example, Phillip

37
Greasley attempts to set up these voices in "Gwendolyn Brook: The Emerging Poetic Voice":
Brooks's early poetry is dense, allusive, European based poetry. Its orientation is
the aesthetic:conveying feeling and experience as art seeking audiences attuned
to art across the ages...her poetry appeals primarily to a white audience...
Her later poetic style reverses all these poetic choices, opting instead for oral,
oratical verse clear and simple enough to be understood in one hearing by
untrained mass audiences. Her approach moves conscious and programmatically
from aesthetic to utilitarian...(14)
I don't agree that voice directed to the black community is so "simple" or "untrained" nor do I
agree that poetic aesthetics are necessarily a European tradition. He later states that in order for
Brooks's poetry reflect the "search for black self- identity and values" the voice must be "angry"
in opposition to a poetic voice containing "beauty" (Greasley, 21). This idea marginalizes the
black female poetic voice as well as belittles the intellect of the black community. However, I
believe Brooks is aware that her poetic voices is divided and marginalized as such. What she has
stated was that her earlier work was "addressed to white people. We [she and her fellow writers
see ourselves crying "UP" to them" (qt. in Greasley, 17). She also comments on that the new
direction of her poetry was to "successfully "call" all black people" and that her voice was not
new but "newish" (Malewitz, 1). This is an important distinction; "newish" avoids that poetic
tradition and the poetic ear are "other" to the black community. The line "for war comes from the
World/ and puzzles a darling duet-" might refer to the original approach of "crying up" in her
poetry of the late 40's. For example, the Annaid - which is a critique on racial and gender roles
through the tradition of epic poetry - was written and set in post World War 2. The puzzling
"darling duet" is sarcastic critique on her earlier attempts to discuss racial and gender oppression
for a white audience ("darling" suggest something pretty but not respected). The "tangle tongues"
illustrate the schism in excluding the black community from the discussion of their own
oppression. The brutal image on the mind and heart reflect the oppression on the consciousness.

38
Yet she ends the image reminding that "there will be a need to forgive." Forgiveness here
represents her poetic voices' duties to reclaiming an aesthetic without seeking validation from a
European audience; while at the same time being aware that the voice and aesthetic have a duty
to the black community. The marriage of directness and lyrical imagery speaks to the diverse
audience of the community while acknowledging that there is an intellectual discussion of
literature that exists. As Raymond Malewitz reiterates in "My Newish Voice": Rethinking Black
Power in Gwendolyn Brook's Whirlwind, "[Gwendolyn Brook's] voice thereby enacts a process
of the black community speaking to itself and explores the diverse implications of its "ultimate
reality" from a position within than external to, its audience" (4).
In conclusion, Gwendolyn Brooks develops what defines the womanist critique by
simultaneously establishing the black woman's voice and establishing the progressive image of
the black community. The womanist looks to take the intentions of the Black Nationalist
movement and continue the progress of black liberation by removing the misogynistic tones of
its male faces. Also she establishes a space that acknowledges the concerns of black women as
well as respect that their fight for the black community is beyond any one particular black
liberation movement. Brooks's work illustrates the dual consciousness of the black female poet
and the community activist. What I look to do in the next chapter is demonstrate how Lucille
Clifton further establishes the womanist critique of the spaces of blackness and womanhood
through deconstructing the dimensions of the black female consciousness in her poetic process.

39

Chapter Two
"The Kids are Here Too": The Significance of Black
Children and the Womanist's Consciousness in Clifton's
Ordinary Woman
For Lucille Clifton the influence of American History and culture weighs heavy on her
work. This influence came from her parents who, although not educated, instilled in their
daughter a fondness of books This knowledge of black American literature and the academy

40
along with knowledge of her ancestry12 (a knowledge that many African Americans don't have
access to), I believe, sets a tone for her work acknowledging black American history as a pivotal
factor in American history and any intellectual conversation on the subject.
Clifton would be the first in her family to attend college when she received a full
scholarship to Howard University. While she did not graduate,13 during her attendance she was
introduced to poets Leroi Jones (later known as Amiri Baracka) Sterling Brown and Toni
Morrison. She married yogi Fred Clifton in 1958. Throughout the ups and downs of both her
education and marriage she took to writing many books of poetry. In 1969, with 6 children and
working as a claims clerk, she looked to poet Robert Hayden to help get her poetry published.
When he passed her works to Carolyn Kizer, another poet, Kizer entered them in a YMCA poetry
contest where Clifton would win the award and her work was published into a book of poetry
entitled Good Times (1969) which was acclaimed by the New York Times . This book of poetry
introduced, what Clifton often does in her works, her fervor and celebration of black American
culture, history and remembrance of African heritage by praising historic resistance to
oppression and their survival of economic and political racism. In 1970 she went on to publish
two children's books. One of them entitled Some Days of Everett Anderson, which won the
Coretta Scott King Book award. The story of Everett Anderson- a young man growing up in the
inner city - would be published in series of books from 1970 – 1984. From 1971 -1984 Clifton
published over 30 books of fiction (poetry and children books). Clifton served as Poet Laureate
of Maryland from 1979 to 1982. Her achievements also include fellowships and honorary
degrees from Fisk University, George Washington University, Trinity College, and other

12
13

Great Grandmother Carolyn was a slave brought to America from Dahomey, West Africa

. Clifton would have to withdraw from Howard University when she lost her scholarship due to low grades. She
would then attend teacher's college in Buffalo but she didn’t not graduate.

41
institutions; two grants from the National Endowment of the Arts; and an Emmy Award. Clifton
was a distinguished Professor of Humanities at St. Mary’s College in Maryland and had a
position at Columbia University from 1995 to 1999.
In 1974 Clifton's collection of poetry, Ordinary Woman was published. This collection
acted as a memoir of her father's family tree, starting with her great grandmothers kidnapping
and settlement as a slave in New Orleans, Louisiana as well as Clifton's conflict with spirituality
when discussing her mother's epilepsy and mental illness. In this collection, Clifton also acts as a
witness to the oppression of Native Americans and Black slaves addressing the failed promises
of reparations. She testifies to the pain of oppression manifested in her parents' tormented
marriage; she confronts racism as an institution “that undermines progressive movements for
social change, in disregard for the black community and the planet Earth as a living and sentient
being" (Jocelyn, 75). She does all of this while illustrating her experience as a socially conscious
black woman tackling the identities of mother, daughter, wife, sister and friend (Jocelyn, 75). She
died in Maryland, February 24th 2010.
Lucille Clifton is a Womanist because she, like Brooks, sees her liberation in relation
with the community. Clifton has stated that while her work can be read without knowing of her
race and gender, knowing allows for a better understanding (Rowell, 58). In relation to how her
works mirrored womanist ideologies, she carefully uses language to make her poetry a reflection
of herself, her community and her politics. Her work speaks to audiences who share her
experiences as well as those whose experiences might be completely opposite. Clifton's emphasis
on identity and language, specifically her poetic process of “I”s demonstrate how creative
writing and activism are not mutually exclusive (Eaton,9). Clifton's appreciation of language is
where she exposes her political agenda. During the nationalist movements she did not affiliate

42
herself with any particular movement per-say, but that doesn't mean that she was unaware of her
race, her gender and her class. She has stated that she “always wanted to use language to its
fullest possibility.(Rowell, 68)” In the case of race and gender liberation, language and
communication plays a major roll in her literary activism. The language of social critiques do not
fit one particular aesthetic. Her wanting to explore the importance of language in American
poetry and its cultural influence(s) means that she looks to expose and articulate an experience
for, at the least, social cognitive change.
In her work, Clifton particularly articulates on the significance of double consciousness in
creating this social change. Understanding one's identity means locating the sources of its
oppressive construction, identifying its specific intentions and liberating the oppression that
exists within the conscious and subconscious. Calvin Herton in his essay, "Sexual Mountains and
Black Woman Writers," mentions that what makes the approach to freeing the conscious a
Womanist approach is the awareness of black women's "triple consciousness"(143). The triple
consciousness allows a self -critical perception of the oppressed experiences of being a woman,
being black and claiming an American identity. Hernton claims that the triple consciousness is
what lead black woman to find a space that didn’t victimize their sex the way the the nationalist
movement did. It also makes sure this space recognizes the racial dynamics associated with their
gender issues (Hernton 143). I believe that a womanist takes this understanding of the triple
consciousness to further understand the significance of each member of the communities
perspective; in hopes that it aids in forming a deeper bond of solidarity within the community.
Clifton showcases her Womanist use of "conscious raising" activism (Herton,143) in her
extremely detailed, self critique of her consciousness in her writing process. Clifton has a
brilliant way of demonstrating the complexities of her identity and how it effects the stages of

43
creating work for the community. In an interview for the Callaloo Journal, she discusses the
importance of what she claims is the African tradition of “both/and” and its common
misplacement with “either/or" (59). Both her triple consciousness and concern for the
community's consciousness introduces a womanist's critique of Double Consciousness. This
view draws on how a womanist not only sees her liberation in relation with the community's
liberation, she also sees a relationship in enlightened consciousness. Clifton discuss this
womanist lens in relation to writing poetry. She talks about the process of the "I" in creating the
works that are critical and instructive for the community:
So my “I” tends to be both me Lucille and the me that stands for people who
look like me, and the me that is also human, [ to the interviewer] you know. I
think if I distinguish anything, there's a distinction between what I look like on
the outside and what somebody else does, and what we are inside. So it's me on
the outside and me as the inside. A guy once said to me something about how he
liked my poetry but couldn’t get into it because he was interested in history. And
I said, “Me too.” [Asking the interviewer] You know? What I'm writing is also
history. And some of it is the history of the inside of us; and some of it is the
history of the outside.(59)
Clifton first stage is establishing the "I"s and the consciousness associated with each. The first “I”
is the "me," the identity that represents internal and personal. This “I” represents personal
aesthetics and a space for her identity over which she has total control. The second “I” she
describes as the “I” for people who look like her. This represents the identity she shares with her
community; it represents the common experiences, cultural traditions and social oppressions that
form a bond of understanding and solidarity. The third “I,” represents her identity on human
level. While she is aware of her identities as a black woman ( and as a member of a community),
this "I" symbolizes the identities of all human beings. In this "I," the diversity in identities that
make up the human race are not placed in social hierarchies. The significance of the human level
“I” is to remind that the ideals that encourage using difference as a means of institutional

44
oppression are a social problem, not a biological one. This idea articulates Alice Walker's
definition of a womanist being a "traditional universalist"(xi). It also indicates that there is an
experience that is shared by all people, and that this experience allows basic levels of empathy.
What Clifton shows is that the womanist concept of consciousness and its application in protest
literature was already practiced as tradition.
The next part in the Womanist view of double consciousness lies in using the "I" to
educate the community. Clifton states that when she's writing poetry she is "writing history also"
(Rowell, 59). This idea of writing history in poetry is a way of using the womanist consciousness
as a means of community uplift. Specifically because Clifton draws a distinction between two
forms of history, she enlightens the community on the issue of consciousness. The two forms of
history are the history "Inside of Us" and "some of [...]the History of the outside." (Some
Outside History) I believe the "Inside of Us" refers to the history that helps transform the two
"I"s (People that look like me and me) into the "us". This history instills identity, citizenship,
freedom (for the community and the self) and tools for dealing with the 'outside' that doesn’t
acknowledge their history. It implies traditions and aesthetics for the community that do not
allow a space for outside oppression. The "Some Outside History" refers to teaching the history
that was constructed to oppress the community by its establishing black people as the "other."
The distinction between the two allows the community to understand the history while being
aware to not internalize the oppression as factual makeup of their person(s). Understanding that
history without internalizing it allows the person within the community to be both conscious of
his/her personal relationships with identity and letting that personal relationship aid in becoming
a better ally for the community.
Clifton has stated that she didn’t know what the Black Arts Movement “was" as she "did

45
not reflect it" (Rowell,65). She has admitted that the movement opened a “gateway” for nonwhite writers, but she did not understand who was defining the black arts movement and why its
aesthetic marginalized many members of the black community. Moreover, Clifton did not find a
definition within these aesthetics that allowed the full embodiment of herself. Clifton had stated
giving all of herself to the creative process as a conscious critical black woman meant that she
participated in creating history. The Black Arts and Black Nationalist movements for many black
women writers meant writing through the “either/or” of what constitutes as black freedom. She
further exemplifies how her existence through her “I” creative writing process demonstrates the
ideology as an Afro-Political womanist:
The Black Aesthetic. I am a black person; everything I write is a black thing.
How could I not? But on the other hand, its always struck me as strange that all of
a sudden [ black] people discovered that when somebody said “nigger” they were
talking about them[...] At the time I thought this must have to do with college.
That's terrible but I'm talking about my younger self. I had not done that. I had
come from poor folks in Buffalo, New York [...]and had seen that my parents
were not even elementary school graduates. My grandparents – I don't know if
they'd seen a school. So the kind of struggles and things that were happening
were not things that I had suddenly discovered involved me too; I had been know
that. (66)
Clifton describes solidarity in its true form. She is a black woman and “expression” of her
blackness shows every action. Therefore when Clifton talks about the “black thing” that will
always be exposed in her writings, it removes the stigma that black literary experience is
abnormal or inorganic. Clifton is saying that to be a black writer and write from the black
experience is no new epistemological finding in American history. Being black is an identity that
shapes how we coexist with others in America. The Black Power/ Black Arts movement fought
against the racial oppression afflicted on our race. Clifton simply articulates that writing black
literature is not a newly found choice of black writers.
In her 1974 collection of poems, Ordinary Woman, Clifton eloquently externalizes

46
personal accounts which makes her poetic voice both subjected to and critical of black woman's
liberation and the synonymous attempts to heal the black community. In "Come Home From the
Movies," Clifton confronts the community on the contradictions of their current blinded (in some
ways artificial) consciousness. The approach to understanding true consciousness lies in the
physical involvement and distinguishing one's own experience and history from that which is
constructed by someone else. Clifton directs this poem to children which, I believe, showcases
the womanist thought in literary style:
Come home from the Movies
Black girls and boys,
the picture be over and the screen
be cold as our neighborhood. (lines 1-4)
“Black girls and boys”, illustrates that who she's commanding are the black children of the
community. This entire time we discussed how women looked to improve the community as a
whole, and Clifton is continuing that tradition by introducing the significance of African
American children in the discourse of black liberation. If the image of the black family had been
appropriated with the category of the "other" would mean that black children too are left with the
task of reclaiming their own identity? As a womanist, Clifton is aware of that experience and
how the fight for their liberation is just as significant as fighting for themselves.
But why the image of children?
For one, articulating the experience between a child/mother disproves that the image of
the black family as this "other" or "abnormal" to the image of a traditional family dynamic (this
had been illustrated with Gwendolyn Brooks). Her voice in the poem takes the tone of an older
and authoritative participant in this community which suggests that she has taken on the role of
an instructor/teacher.
Like Brooks, Clifton is also respected as a traditional American poet, her poetry is

47
respected in the eyes of the Eurocentric academe. The image in the first stanza demonstrates how
Clifton's poetry brings the community into the literary tradition. When the voice tells the black
children to come home now that movie is over, the image of the "screen being as cold as our
neighborhood" painted an image that reminded me of Plato's Allegory of the Cave. The image of
the movie theater taking the attention of black children away from the community in many ways
mirrors the essence of Plato's allegory, in which he states:
Make an image of our nature in its education and want of education, likening it to
a condition of the following kind. See human beings as though they were in an
underground cave-like dwelling with its entrance a long one, open to the light
across the whole width of the cave. They are in it from childhood...they are fixed,
seeing only in front of them...Their light is from a fire burning far above and
behind them. Between the fire and the prisoners there is a road above, along
which see a wall, built like the partitions puppet-handlers set in front of the
human beings and over which they show puppets.(Book VII, 514 a- b)
Clifton brings the classic literary and philosophical image of the oppressed mind into the
contemporary settings of the 60's -70's America. The movies is a great comparison to the image
of the cave: the long dark hallways, the people only able to look forward as images are projected
to them from a light source high and behind them. The images of the movie are illustrated only
when the film isn't playing to establish a comparison between the coldness of an empty screen
and the coldness of the (real) living neighborhood. This comparison sets a stage that will
showcase how the movie, like the cave, represents the artificial ideologies that are constructed
through oppression.
The next stanza further develops the movie being a metaphor for the oppressed conscious
when Clifton writes:
Come home from the show,
don't be the show
Take off some flowers and plant them,
pick up some papers and read them,
stop making babies and raise them.

48
The voice again calls the children home, instructing them to "not be the show" which plays on
the image of the movie being an artificial vision that's meant to alter the viewers reality. Asking
them to not be the show suggests that Clifton is also aware of the implications of the movie. The
double consciousness of history that Clifton says she writes into her poetry makes its way into
this stanza as she distinguishes what it means to be "the show" and what it means to be part of
actual progress. In the lines "Take off some flowers and plant them,/ pick up some papers and
read them" notice how Clifton takes the images of flowers and papers from a space of
artificiality into organic and active spaces. The flowers that are taken off and planted suggest that
the children validated the artificial significance of the image rather than doing something
creative, natural and insures growth. The artificial flower might be Clifton addressing the popular
social movements of the time, possibly the flowers that are taken off refer to the "flower power"
trend of the free- love movement. The history of African Americans of being conscious and
proactive go beyond the trending images of what it means to be pro- black. The "papers" might
suggest text that the movement used to support their current aesthetics or the black nationalists
bashing of earlier black political/literary movements (Harlem Renaissance). Clifton asks the
black youth to not let the "show's" message determine what writings of your own community to
read. The importance is to "read" the literature, understand its significance and its context as
establishing a black voice within the literary aesthetic. These lines mirror her discussion on
writing the "history of us" because basing the consciousness on the "show" means existing the
artificial space of trending fashions and ideals when there is a history that showcases a tradition
of progress, growth and intellectual thought. The line "stop making babies and raise them" I
believe is Clifton asking for the community to not just focus on immediately altering the mindset en masse. Instead, the community should be focused not only on educating themselves with

49
Black history but also with the history of the society in which they live. Raising a child means
ensuring that it is capable of surviving and functioning in the world. Clifton wants to ensure that
the future of the black community doesn't base all knowledge of black pride and legacy in one
specific time frame. That extremely limited view- no matter how pro-black- subjects the
community to having their aesthetics and beliefs altered for them.
While black women have become victims of oppression within their own race, the voice
realizes the importance of healing the community by giving direction to the younger generation.
Clifton continues to showcase the significance of exposing the black youth to the dimensions of
consciousness. In the following lines Clifton demonstrates how the youth participate in
empowering the black community through being the symbols of transformation :
Come home from the movies
Black girls and boys,
show our fathers how to walk like men,
they already know how to dance. (10-13)
She repeats the first two lines of the poem reminding the reader that the first objective is to get
the children away from that space of artificial consciousness. She then writes that the children
need to "show our fathers how to walk like men," In this line I saw Clifton brilliantly showing
the significance of including black children in the discussion of black liberation. Black children
are members of the community who interact least in spaces of whiteness. Where adults work,
study and interact in spaces and institutions that simulate racial oppression, children -however
slightly- are less affected by the daily oppressive encounters of their elders. This suggests that
black children serve as a reminder that the black community is still a black space of support and
solidarity. Children are still being taught to "walk like men," where the oppressive acts on black
adults' consciousnesses might have lead some to stray off the path. If we were to put these lines
in context with the Black Nationalist Movement, the children in the community represent a

50
generation born into the notions of "black power," and "black is beautiful" yet their age has
protected them from the oppressive context to which black males were subjected. The black men
knowing how to "dance" instead of "walk" illustrates that black men have become "the show."
Their actions are as reactionary as dancing to music. Black children portray black solidarity as
not reactionary but progressive and proactive. Children are Clifton's attempt to link the black
men and women from their separatist aesthetics. Alice Walker states that a womanist is not a
separatist, therefore the goal of a womanist is to not punish the failures of black men but
empower them back to their better consciousness. The aesthetics of the Black Nationalist
movement created a separatist approach to the black family and gender roles. Children of the
black community however are reminded that the issues of the community are not just a matter of
"men vs. women." For Clifton, children represented the importance of maintaining the
"dynamic" within the community.
But Why So Little Critique?
While I was researching prose on what defines a womanist, critiques on locating womanist
literary traditions, when it came time to researching these political critiques on Lucille Clifton I
could barely find enough to support a one page paper. If there were any black feminist critiques
that mentioned her name, they did just that - mention her name in a sentence and move on. So I
began to look at the essays that did critique her work and what I noticed was that these critiques
focused on her American identity; essays concerning race focus on her language as a traditional
American poet who loves sharing stories between the generations. Why were there so few black
feminist critiquing the political analysis of race and gender in her work and so many of
Gwendolyn Brooks? So I looked into the history of the black feminist critique and came across
this quote by Farrah Jasmine Griffin on black women's poetry of the early 70's; she writes:

51
(Regarding the Black Woman: An Anthology (1970)) Although that volume does
not contain literary criticism, it does contain poetry, short stories, essays, and
critical analysis by an emerging generation of black women thinkers. This text is
not addressed to an academic audience but instead to a diverse variety of black
women readers... the text itself is not necessarily a feminist document; instead it
holds a myriad of opinions about the status and place of black women in the
black freedom movement, in the women's rights movement, and in American
society at large (485)
This statement disregards Black woman writer's literary tradition of invoking political thought by
making her efforts of exposure revolve around the community. As Eaton states, "black women
activists were working within and writing about the black community in ways that they hoped
would ensure progressive action after the signing of the civil rights legislation and in the coming
years. (8)” Brooks might have received many more critiques because her early works were
written specifically to/for the readers of the academy. While her later works openly staged her
conflicts of writing for the academy and the black community. Clifton describes her poetry as
“many- layered,” meaning that she dedicates the use of language to makes her poetry able to be
“read and understood in some ways by literary critics and theoreticians and also by [her] Aunt
Timmy and Uncle Buddy" (69). That statement on its surface means that she wants her writing to
connect to everyone, but it also references writing from that human level that connects all people.
In other words her writing process shines light on the intellectual consciousness that exist within
the varied people(s) that make up black community.
Clifton has consistently maintained that (especially in the black community) poetry
exposes the “layers” that connect all of us. One major way academics like Griffin determine
when text is academically feminist and a “myriad” of opinions, is class. When womanist began
fighting for the improvements in the black community it usually meant reaching out to working
and lower class black communities. Poetry from Clifton and Brooks both reference and write to
the lower and working classes in the black community, which is why to write- off addressing

52
literature to the everyday person as not being a formal feminist document actually goes against
one of the major staples of the womanist movement. Moreover, Griffin's statement puts the
diversity of black woman in opposition to academics. If this is the case, then the following
questions must be answered: How do they distinguish these images as an “academic” critique or
“myriad opinion”? And how does one avoid class, when the targeted audience is defined by
whether or not the images and language are academically worthy? For: there are two pieces of
poetry both discussing the black female body in response to misogyny in the black nationalist
movement, both are written during the beginning stages of the womanist movement; what makes
one piece likely to be more important? According to Griffin, the audience needs to be directed to
the Eurocentric academe (which usually means an audience of higher economic class). This
results in the literary image of the female black body being treated as commodity. Instead of
saying this image is of “higher class,” it is coined “academic.”
While this may not be Griffin's intention, it is evident that when discussing literary
theory of oppressed people in the academy, if black women's images are not placed in spaces of
extremes or irregularity, there's a common exclusion of black women. To fix this, womanist poets
like Clifton stage an encounter between literature and community, creating a space for black
women in the American literary discourse.
While it was not labeled yet as “womanist theory,” Clifton's process of the "I"s and the
“both/and” are highly intellectual tools for translating her identity and agenda. This practice is
almost identical to what Eaton later states that “by using literature as a form of activism, the
black woman writer's insider position and stake in the eradication of injustice enables her to
negotiate multidimensional experiences (ie black /woman/ partner/ writer/ activist)" (9).
The “I”s allow for multidimensional experiences within teaching this history. The “I” is

53
not allocated to a particular identity or specific time in history, that would mean using the
“either/or.” When it comes to writing her poetry, Clifton states that her work comes from “both
intellect and intuition. One does not separate oneself out" (61). To write from both intellect and
intuition requires writing from the all “I”s. It requires personal reflection, observation of how
you see yourself and how others see you as a representation of your gender, race and other
objective signifiers. In other words, when Clifton writes her poetry, she documents herself while
truthfully expressing and intellectually critiquing herself and her experiences from an internal,
external and instinctual position. This, I think, is how one uses creative literature as a means of
executing a creative black feminist and womanist critique. Clifton makes her work both primary
and secondary historical sources by writing both creative and historical pieces. She takes on the
discourse of womanism and creates poetry that has no limits on what it means to be a poet, a
woman or black. She states, “A person can, I hope, enjoy the poetry without knowing that I am
black or female. But it adds to their understanding if they do know it – that is, that I am black
and female. To me, that I am what I am is all of it; all of what I am is relevant” (58).
Clifton's poetry and her articulation of the poetic process demonstrates how a womanist
critiques the triple and double consciousnesses of herself and of the community. She engages and
enlightens the community to critiquing consciousness thus keeping black progress an issue that
will be carried into future generations. With Nikki Giovanni we will see how she continues the
critique of black consciousness, and the significance of black women in establishing space,
aesthetics, and ideologies. Giovanni explores the Black woman's body as a route by which
aesthetics and ideologies (whether they be progressive or oppressive) are placed.

54

Chapter Three
Reclaiming the Body, Redefining the "Space": Critiquing
Feminist and Femininity in Giovanni's
My House
"Love" has been a theme both Gwendolyn Brooks and Nikki Giovanni have used to
illustrate the balancing act of maintaining support for her community while maintaining a space
of her black womanhood and aesthetics. In "Black Wedding Song," Gwendolyn Brooks used
love to stage a marriage between her black militant and traditionally eloquent poetic styles; while
demonstrating how articulating on the subject of 'love' in the black community represents a proactive move to reclaim the identities in the black family dynamic. Nikki Giovanni uses "love" to
define the poetry she has written in her 1972 collection My House (Domash and Juhasz, 149).
Her work focuses racial politics of motherhood, the black community, and the everyday
encounters. However, love is not a term of endearment between two people, it is an institution
that takes on the role of unity and restriction. Giovanni also defines her books of poetry for the
specific duty of black militancy "works of love" (149).
For the black community, love represents a balancing act between symbolizing an
opportunity to celebrate the black community as well as act as a metaphor for its division. As I
had discussed in the introduction, images of the black woman had been instituted to dehumanize
the idea of black femininity, specifically regarding black sexuality and motherhood
(Higginbotham,257; Franklin 434). The images of the "Jezebel" constructed the idea of black
women's animalistic promiscuity and made it impossible for black people to engage in
relationships; while the image of the "mammy" suggested that the black mother was not located

55
in the black home but in the home of her white masters. Therefore, 'love' (as a metaphor for
division) symbolized an emotion that was particular to a feminine identity black women were
"unable" to possess; the idea of a black women loving a black man, having a family and loving
her family as a mother was also impossible (White, 61). Black women activists look to
reconstruct the image of black family because its image has been so oppressed institutionally.
Having the image of a family dynamic had been equated with having a national (and humane)
identity (Higginbotham, 263). For black women poets, "love" was a political force because it
rejected all of the images that symbolized black people's 'inhumanity'(263). "Love" represents a
relationship that exists in the black home, moreover, a relationship with black women, black men
and black children. "Love" proves that the black family is, and has always been, an American
image.
The black American family dynamic had reached a turning point in the Black Nationalist
Movement when it came to identifying and racing gender status. Before this movement,
establishing the black family meant black women, black men and black children working
together to help each reclaim their gender and national identity (Thompson, 159). Since it was
usual that black men and women were both working out of the home, gender roles were not seen
through the patriarchal lens from which white feminists aimed to free themselves. Restoring the
black family meant the ability to participate in building black community. The aesthetics of the
Nationalist Movement, however, employed an aesthetic that black men needed to appropriate the
same roles of patriarchy their white counterparts had done in their families. Therefore, the
nationalist movement redefined black solidarity in the family dynamic by demanding that the
role of black woman was to"inspire her man" (qt. from Franklin, 434). As V.P. Franklin discusses
in "Hidden in Plain View: African American Women, Radical Feminism, and the Origins of

56
Women's Studies Program," the academe of Black Studies, black women were "repelled" by the
misogyny "exhibited by male Black Power advocates" (434). For black women, restoring the
progressive gender roles meant reconstructing a black feminine identity. Giovanni's "love
poems" - like Clifton's use of the 'I's - reminded readers that the history of black liberation
(especially concerning black women) has always meant liberating black identity from its white
oppressive construction.
In a 1974 interview conducted at the University of Colorado, "A Talk With Nikki
Giovanni," Nikki Giovanni explains that, for her, to be a feminist is impossible because of its
racial bias. This interview really clarified how black women saw their role in the liberation
movement. She responds to not calling herself a feminist by simply saying that she “cant define
it and tell you why [she's] not" (147). How can she become unified with an identity that doesn’t
acknowledge her oppression. She is oppressed as a black person and the problems that she faces
"predominately, are problems of racism in America" (147). From this point on in the interview
her critique on white feminism also touches on aesthetics that would define black feminism/
womanism. Giovanni continues to elaborate on how she cannot support the feminist movement
because it does not support the efforts of other oppressed people, particularly the oppression of
children of color. She references the racist protest taking place in Boston concerning bussing
children of color to school. She brings up the example of Gloria Steinem, then president of
NOW14, stating that she “goes all over the world...to build the case for women, but she can't to
Boston say, 'Please Stop Throwing Bricks at Those Kids'" (147). Here Giovanni sees her
oppression in relation to her entire community.
Giovanni then discusses that what separates the black female and white female's

14

The National Organization of Woman (NOW) is the largest feminist activist organizations. Founded in 1966, NOW
has over 500,000 members around the country.

57
perception of oppression and liberation depends on social experience. She argues that “We [black
women] are not talking about the quality of life, we are talking about having to participate in the
life as it exists, and that is a big hell of a difference" (148). When Giovanni talks about quality of
life versus participation she means feminist mystique15 searching for an alter reality, a place of
escape from life that they consider mundane and restrictive. No matter what they do, the image
of the white community as a whole is not tarnished because women's freedom and escapism has
become synonymous in definition. They are subjected to roles that might limit the spirit but still
hold their feminine identity to a certain esteem and unmovable role in family dynamics.
Participation is vital for any form of liberation in the black community. According to Giovanni,
calling yourself a feminist depends on how you participate in life aware that your womanhood is
a social construct (Domash and Juhasz, 149). Black feminist/ womanist since the 19th century
have understood the importance of how they participate within the dynamics of whiteness,
masculinity, and nationality. As she stated in her interview, “the history of black women is
beyond feminism.(149)” In other words, the moment in which black women were legally given
citizenship required that they fought for equal rights and equal participation in the spaces of
America that symbolized social, economical, and political prosperity (Thompson, 161).
In the same interview, Giovanni hints that these women might have turned away from the
issues of black women because they were not willing to relinquish the privilege and power that
comes with whiteness. She writes:
In about ten years, the white woman will be where the black women are,
in terms of responsibility
White women are just now experiencing the problem of desertion. A
greater number of white men are just walking away from their families; they're
saying “we dont want it.” And the women who thought that they were liberated,
thought it was really a lot of fun, all of a sudden find they have to pay the rent and
15

Feminist Mystique, published February 19, 1963,[1] by W.W. Norton and Co., is a nonfiction book written by
Betty Friedan. This book examined the unhappy lifestyles of the housewives of the 1950's and 1960's.

58
buy shoes and get food...In other words, they found themselves where black
women have found themselves for the last hundred years, standing alone saying,
How do I rear a family? (148)

Womanist poets like Giovanni critiqued white feminist ideologies and simultaneously
translated the political ideologies of the black community that were formulated by black women,
into poetry that mirrors the socio-political encounters of black people. Like Brooks, Giovanni's
poetry has the voice of a womanist activist, but it's important to not marginalize her voice as a
black woman poet to the space of a political lecture. As poets, there is a literary aesthetic with
which these women identify. So while there is purpose to respond to an external effect, the poetic
aesthetic is what allows the poem to reflect her personal identity (as I mentioned earlier, Clifton
demonstrated this effect in her breaking down her consciousness - the 'I' for her community and
the 'I' for the the individual). Also, Giovanni is aware that marginalizing the activism in the black
female community to one current political movement discredits the political and social plights
these women made.
In My House (1972), a common theme that occurs in these poems is how black women in
many ways act as a vessel that allows the transferal of traditions, culture, and identity between
generations. In her 1992 essay, “Interstices: A Small Drama of Frame Words,” Hortense Spillers
discusses sexuality and the space of the black women's body in the tradition of black literature
and culture. Spillers writes, “[the black woman] became instead the principle point of passage
between the human and the non- human world. Her issues became the focus of a cunning
difference – visually, psychologically, ontologically – as the route by which the dominant male
decided the distinction between humanity and the 'other'" (qt. from Griffin 497). Contemporary
critic Sharon Holland, one of the many new critics who are inspired by Spillers, elaborated that
idea in "Raising the Dead: Reading of Death and (Black) Subjectivity”:

59
Black female bodies serve as a passage between the humanity and nonhumanity as well as the articulation of the passage. I would suggest that this
border, which is no border at all but a passageway, also encompasses the terrain
between the living and the dead, between the ancestral and the living
community...Elaborating on Spillers central points in 'Interstices' that 'black
vestibular to culture,' I would like to add that this space is both material and
linguistic – a chamber housing the flesh and its attending language. (43)
It is this theme that suggest that the term “love” is a metaphor for reclaiming the black
female body and black femininity. What the Jezebel and Mammy both have in common is that
these myths portray black women as incapable of loving herself and her family. A womanist
articulation of love suggests choice, aesthetic traditions, and feminine identity that are defined,
controlled and passed down by black women. "Categories" approaches what happens when a
black woman realizes the duality in her consciousness and how the conscious exists in multiple
spaces, particularly in the space of white feminism. "When I Die" explores the significance and
variations of defining space.
In her poem"Categories," Giovanni illustrates the process by which a black woman,
realizes that her identity is victim to construction of these myths. Further more it takes the reader
through the process of deconstructing these images and re-defining her identity and reclaiming
her body through the traditions passed down from the black women before her. Thus
establishing a consciousness that engages the reader to the importance of how the liberation of
the black female is crucial for the liberation of the black community. Giovanni's first stanza
introduces how one realizes the exploitation of her identity. She writes:
sometimes you hear a question like "what is before
your responsibility as an unwed mother"
and some other times you stand sweating profusely before
going on stage and somebody says "but you are used
to it" (lines 1- 5)
These five lines introduce Giovanni's womanist thought on who she is versus what she represents.

60
The questions and statements said are very personal of Giovanni's life as she was an unwed
mother in the late 1960's, yet she uses the word "you" instead of "I". This distinction is done to
establish that these statements about her identity are not internalized. Giovanni has made
mention to how she is aware of the roles society expects her to internalize concerning her
motherhood. In an 2003 interview, Nikki Giovanni expressed how she dealt with the image of
being a single mother in 1969. She responded:
"I never looked at myself through anybody's eyes. And I was talking to
somebody else recently. I've never looked at the world through white eyes and
I've never looked at myself through anybody's eyes...anybody that didn't have
anything positive to say to me about my expecting the baby, I knew they weren't
a friend. And so they had to go..."16
It does however, show how something as personal as motherhood and poetry are immediately
appropriated with roles that she is expected to perform. The "you" also invites other black
women to participate in this confronting of the issue of differentiating the external and personal
construction of identity. What caught my attention was how the question "what is your
responsibility as an unwed mother" is not closed with a question mark. A question mark would
make that line appear as a literal question and therefore expect a response. While she uses the
word question, the line reads as a statement. It is as if whoever is saying this is not asking how
she feels about being an unwed mother, rather demanding that she know the roles constructed
with the image of an unwed black mother and act them out accordingly.
Giovanni from the beginning knew that while her identity as black woman had been
stereotyped, she was always nonetheless conscious of the external nature of these images. In
other words, she understood that it was illogical to see herself through "white eyes" or
"anybody's eyes" because that would mean that she has no consciousness of her black
16

Nikki Giovanni (The HistoryMakers A2003.027), interview by Adele Hodge, 01/31/2003, The HistoryMakers
Digital Archive. Session 1, tape 4, story 4, Nikki Giovanni discusses being pregnant and unwed in 1969.
http://www.idvl.org/thehistorymakers/iCoreClient.html#/&n=4505

61
womanhood. If she had no say in something as personal as her body, it meant the oppressors who
constructed those images were in control of her and her child. Therefore, Giovanni does not end
that "question" with a question mark because it doesn't deserve her answer. In the first two lines
she expresses that black women already have the power to separate the external images of
oppression from her personal relationship between her body and her community (the child.) This
realization is what allows Giovanni to create a space to exercise her woman(ness), since social
constructions provided none.
Then she writes on her emotions and vulnerability about performing (what would
presumably be her poetry) and the external voice responds, "but you are used to it." I believe
Giovanni wants to show how external construction not only looks to claim your identity as a
woman but looks to appropriate your relationship with your personal creative process. The voice
discredits and rejects Giovanni's external emotional reaction. Giovanni wants to demonstrate
how the oppressive construction of black women's identity looks to control the most personal
parts of the self. Stating "but you are used to it," is a command that immediately denies
Giovanni's attachment to her poetry.
Giovanni's first 5 lines exposed the control and creative freedom poetry has for selfdefined identity. The next lines begin the process of how one might realize the shaping of black
women's identity, and where that realization leads to if they wish to deconstruct it. She writes:
Or maybe you look into a face you've never seen
or never noticed and you know
the ugly awful loneliness of being
locked into a mind and body that belong
to a name or non-name - not that it matters (lines 6- 10)
Notice that Giovanni writes "look into" instead of "look at." Looking into a face signifies looking
at what the object represents, as well as examining how it effects your visual perception. The

62
ambiguity in who's unrecognizable face the black woman ("you") might be looking into is a
clever way of illustrating that once you internalize an external construction of your identity you
lose perception on whether the reflection is your own or the person who constructed it. Once
internalized, the face is ambiguous because it cannot be distinguished between your own and the
other nor can you distinguish if you've had no input in defining it. Once the person has looked
into this unknown face, they start to notice just how this face has affected her internal perception
of the self. These internal perceptions ("ugly" "awful" "loneliness") represent how these social
images are meant to have the black women become symbol of failure of what defines a feminine
identity (Hernton, 144).Then Giovanni writes how these images are "locked into the mind and
body that belongs to a name or non-name." The term 'lock', solidifies that once these images are
appropriated it's no longer just a matter of personal aesthetics; the social oppression of your
womanhood acts as parasite- its attaches to the body, molding the mind's perception of the self.
In Hortense Spillers essay "Mama's Baby, Papa's Maybe: An American Grammar Book," she
elaborates on how external construction looks to capture the black feminine identity with locking
the intimacy of black women's sexuality with reductive and objective imagery. She brilliantly
explains:
But this body, at least from the point of view of the captive community, focuses
a private and particular space, at which point of convergence biological, sexual,
social, cultural, linguistic, ritualistic, and psychological fortunes join. This
profound intimacy of interlocking detail is disrupted, however, by externally
imposed meanings and uses: 1) the captive body becomes the source of an
irresistible, destructive sensuality; 2) at the same time in stunning contradictionthe captive body reduces to a thing, becoming being for the captor; 3) in this
absence from a subject position, the captured sexualities provide a physical and
biological expression of "otherness"; 4) as a category of "otherness," the
captive body translates into a potential for pornotroping and embodies sheer
physical powerlessness that slides into a more general "powerlessness,"
resonating through various centers of human and social meaning. (67)
The internalized images are used as a route by which oppressive ideologies of race and gender

63
become programmed as inherited traits black women possess biologically, not socially. This
mirrors what Spillers claims on the oppressive side of the tradition of black female body as a
passage ("Interstices", Spillers, 76). Giovanni exposes that this body belongs to a "name or nonname." The name and non-name are both italicized which suggests that each has a significance to
its title (or lack there of). Name signifies that there is no longer a specific person or a set group of
people who can be identified as the sole oppressor. Racist ideologies in America have long since
been ingrained in almost every major institution, as well as ingrained in the everyday encounters
we have with each other. Name calls out the individuals who perpetuate these ideologies, holding
them accountable. The non-name symbolizes how the state of racism being institutionalized
makes it easier for the individual to be less accountable for their actions. As I mentioned earlier,
using the black woman's body against itself by constructing her identity instills her image of
failure, her oppressions, the negative images she represents to others and to herself. The power of
not having a specific face to institutional racism makes the oppression of identity seem like it's
her fault. However Giovanni insists that whether or not the source of oppression can be named in
this case "it doesn't matter." The important matter at this point of the poem is to realize that the
source of black women's oppression is external. The interest should be re-claiming the black
female body as a personal space. I believe in reclaiming this space, Giovanni is reclaiming the
literary tradition of using the black female body as passage. The black woman has control of her
body and the passage that it represents is allocated to her community.
In the next stanza, Giovanni stages an encounter between black and white women. This
stanza is Giovanni's critique on how images of black women's body are sometimes used as a
symbol of "otherness" to establish the positive image of the white female. Now that the black
female body has been exposed to the distinction between her identity and the socially constructed

64
one, Giovanni also seeks to de-myth the identity of the black women when placed in these
racialized encounters. She writes:
and sometimes on rainy nights you see
an old white woman who maybe you'd really care about
except that you're a young black woman
whose job it is to kill maim or seriously
make her question
the validity of her existence (lines 17- 22)
The white woman is old because she represents the tradition of a racist femininity. Before the
black woman became aware of her identity she might have "really care[d] about" this tradition
because her identity was constructed in maintaining the construction of the old white woman's
identity. Giovanni describes the black woman as "young" to represent the new consciousness
which threatens this tradition. This the why the images of "kill" and "maim" are set in
comparison with questioning her validity (the use of "or" suggests two options - questioning
validity and physically harming a person- are of the same value). The young black woman is
destroying the validity of the tradition. Her "new" self construction no longer supports the self
construction of the white woman. This encounter being set on a rainy night might speak on the
vulnerability of the racialized tradition. A rainy night suggest being more exposed to the
"elements." In the case of this stanza the old white woman might be vulnerable to the changing
"elements" of the black female identity.
Giovanni is not advocating a divide between women. She had stated that "[black and
white women] should support each other, but I will not take on your oppression" (Domash and
Juhasz, 148). Giovanni is aware of this gap between black and white women. I see her next
stanza as the clever and careful way of approaching double consciousness when directing a voice
to the idea of a slight universal womanhood, but still staying true to betterment and
empowerment of her community She then writes:

65
and you look at her kind of funny colored eyes
and you think
if she weren't such an aggressive bitch she would see
that if you weren't such a Black one
there would be a relationship but anyway- it doesn't
matter
much - except you started out to kill her and now find
you just don't give a damn cause it's all somewhat
of a bore (lines 23- 31)
The first thing I noticed is that Giovanni states that black woman "looks at" which is a departure
from the black woman who "looks into" when her identity wasn't self constructed. She then
threads the perceptions each woman has of each other, holding them both accountable for the
"relationship" that could have happened. Giovanni doesn't just illustrate the black woman's
perception of the white woman. She claims this relationship could have happened if the white
women was honest about her anger perceptions of black women. However Giovanni states "you
just don't give a damn cause its all somewhat of a bore," which can translate into the black
woman being beyond what her identity is suppose to be at the moment. While Giovanni
introduces this idea, she does not pine over it when she states "it doesn't matter." The last two
lines of this stanza might be Giovanni trying to reintroduce the roles of the black woman's
constructed identity.
The next stanza explores black women when engaging in a white feminine space.
Giovanni is extremely intentional about the construction of her poetry. The story told can be both
interpreted because of its poetic space and also "pretty much stand without explanation"(Domash
and Juhasz, 150). This poem's structure is an extremely organized process by which Giovanni
takes the image of the black woman deconstructs it to make her conscious of her body as a route
to distinguish her otherness and her oppression. The stanza following demonstrates the
womanists ability to exist with certain universalist qualities without compromising her black

66
identity. She writes:
so you speak of your mother or sister or very good friend
and really you speak of your feelings which are too
personal
for anyone else
to take a chance of feeling
and you eat that godaweful food and you get somehow
through it and if this seems
like somewhat of a tentative poem it's probably
because i just realized that
i'm bored with categories (lines 32- 41)
Giovanni had written in the previous stanza that she is "bored" by thinking of what relationships
could have been formed between the two women. Instead she has the black woman engage in a
conversation that illustrates what it means to operate in a white feminist space. The black woman
speaks on the black women in her life to assert the image of the black woman in this space. Once
the image has been brought in Giovanni then writes that the black woman "speaks of [her]
feelings which are too/personal/for anyone else/to take a chance of feeling." These lines have a
slightly satirical tone, since Giovanni switches from illustrating the white woman being maimed
and now she is an outlet for personal feelings. However, feelings might be Giovanni's sarcastic
'boredom' with racialized feminine images. When Giovanni says discussing these feelings are
"too personal for anyone else," she critiques the privilege and narcissism of the white feminist
tradition. The white feminist movement was not going to address the oppressive concerns of
being a black woman, so Giovanni's reduces the feminist discourse by defining the sharing of the
black woman's experience to talking about "feelings." The image of getting through the
"godawful food" illustrates the black woman dealing with ingesting this tradition that her new
consciousness is not interested in internalizing it. Having to reduce the black female experience
to "feelings" while having to get through being fed "godawful" aesthetics is what leads Giovanni
to end this poem with the clear, direct and aloof "i just realized that/i'm bored with categories."

67
To Giovanni her identity and "the history of black women is beyond feminism" (Domash and
Juhasz, 148).
While categories addressed the black woman's multi- consciousness in different spaces,
"When I Die" begins to explore the many definitions of space and why a deconstruction of that
word aids in better understanding the oppression of the black identity and body.
In the poem “When I Die,” Giovanni creates a last will and testament, as she expresses
her last wishes for her family, the community and the society that looked to define or silence her
existence. Moreover, she makes the location of her influences ambiguous to a specific raced
group. Which make sense seeing that black women have been used to shape and define the
different spectrum of gender, racial, and American identity. She writes:
when i die i hope every worker in the national security
council
the interpol of the fbicia foundation for the development
of black women gets
an extra bonus and maybe takes one day off
and maybe even asks why they didn't work as hard for us
as they did
them
but it always seems to be that way (lines 8 -16)
In this second stanza she calls out the institution of government. More specifically she addresses
the FBI and CIA, (as one word because they are interchangeable in their duties) and states that
these groups worked for the "development of black women." This statement displaces and
expands the space for black women in the ethos17 of society. By placing black women in the

17

This poem, like all womanist text needs to be read for its literal and figurative context. Black women represent the
"characteristic manner or spirit, either of a community, or individual." As she exists within the the triple veil of
identity as an "other." She (the black womanist) is aware that she must live conscious of both her self-defined
and socially defined identity. She must also deal with the fact that she defines her co-inhabitants and oppressors.
Literally 'ethos' "is a word that indicates a certain "attitude" or sense of comportment towards others, and
generally associated with questions of character or moral self-hood, where character or moral self-hood disclose
a bond with others." (www.texascollaborative.org/Urban_Module/glossary.htm )Figuratively, in the case of
womanist poetry, I use 'ethos' as an " internal social context of a work of literature, comprising the
characterization and setting of fictional literature and the relation of the author to his reader or audience in

68
surveillance of governmental groups who's missions are to protect the American people and
provide "intelligence" for them and their governmental superiors,18 Giovanni refutes the idea that
the black woman is invisible to society. The "fbicia" symbolize the communication of
intelligence between the different sectors of political power and black women are a topic that is
not only discussed but a sector of focus for members of these groups. Notice, though, that she did
not suggest that these workers are working to protect these black women, she instead says that
these people work for the "development" of black women.
Firstly, "development" can stand for the architectural actions the American government
has enacted for the sake developing a 'space' for "black progress." Historically, the development
of government Public Housing (commonly known and used in this project, as the "projects")
plays an influential role on how America sees the black family, and in many ways the black
mother/motherhood. The American housing projects were first established during the New Deal
of the 1940's, as one solution to cure the economic travesty that was the Great Depression (1929
- 1935). The initiative was to provide subsidized housing for the middle- class residents.
Residents of the first 8 projects went on to own their apartments, thus, at the time, establishing
the projects as successfully aiding in the development of the American economy. Evictions and
tenemant demolitions, shifted the projects demographic from middle-class to a more diverse
mixture of the middle, lower middle and working class and because of the subsidized and rentcontrolled apartments, some living on and below the poverty line were able to find residence in
them. Yet at this point, the projects were still seen as a triumph in the American economy
thematic literature." (http://web.mac.com/radney/humanities/litcrit/gloss.htm )In both the literal and figurative
manner, Black women help construct and are constructed in the fabric of the American aesthetic, law and policy,
ontological theory, and oppression and freedom.
18
This is paraphrase comes from reading both mission statements of the FBI and the CIA. The FBI web description
states to "Our mission is to help protect you, your children, your communities, and your businesses from the
most dangerous threats facing our nation..." (FBI.gov) The CIA's webpage states "The Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) is an independent US Government agency responsible for providing national security intelligence
to senior US policymakers" (CIA.gov)

69
because it showed the American government as wanting to participate in uplifting its citizens to
the modules of urban middle or upper class living. I would say that this image was funded and
supported because when one puts the terms 'American citizen' and 'middle-class' in an image
that was usually white. Mostly whites lived in these projects at the time. By the1950's the baby
boom was in full force, the establishment of an American middle class, and with this post war
middle class there came a push to recreate the suburban American family image. At the same
time, more people living in poverty began looking to housing projects because Federal Law
required that residents of the projects only had to pay a quarter of their income for rent. This was
not appealing to the middle-class who would have to pay more. Thus began, what historians call,
the "ghettofication" of the projects (Jackson, 229). This meant that as more black families were
moving into the projects, the government increased their neglect in maintaining and funding of
these apartments and neighborhoods. Giovanni is addressing the government's part in aiding in
constructing ("developing") the black female image. Moreover, the stanza illustrates how she
saw the fight for liberation from government oppression as a fight for her blackness, her
womanhood. Governments rejected the image of the black family by rejecting the images of
black neighborhood.
The "interpol of the fbicia" literally means that that there is a federally funded
communication between the sectors in this institution about the welfare of black people; this
sharing of intelligence means that that black community, the black family, and thus the "black
woman" is of importance to maintaining an "American status quo19". Giovanni illustrates the
insidious nature of institutionalized racism by using the image spy-groups who are in charge of

19

When I say "American status quo," I refer to to the maintenance of whiteness as a neutral space that defines what
it means to have an American identity/citizenship. American history shows that institutions have defined white as
a race that is biologically inherit the "intelligence and capability" of maintaining economic prosperity. (The Bell
Curve, Hernstien and Murray 269 - 316)

70
surveillance and monitoring of the black community; with the approach of covert actions rather
than overt ones. What's unfortunate is that the goal of their actions is to prefabricate the black
image as a means of systematic oppression. Giovanni then wishes that when she dies, these
fbicia workers "get an extra bonus and maybe a day off/ and maybe even asks why they didn't
work as hard for us/ as they did /them." A bonus and day off further instills that the government's
coded oppression of blacks through residential segregation and economic neglect is not an
unconscious action.
This idea of being completely "unconscious" of enacting oppression on blacks is
something that Nikki Giovanni does not stand for. Any exposure of the unconscious thought in
My House applies to subjects of oppression, because part of reclaiming and redefining your own
racial and gender identity from a supremacist construction, means being conscious of the double
veils of being black in America and the triple veils of being a black woman in America. In the
interview "A Talk with Nikki Giovanni," she states that My House marks the moment where if
she were to critique a particular politician (presumably white), or her opinion on current political
issues she would not put it in her poetry; "[a] poem would give it too much space, and it doesn't
deserve that kind of space, because what you've got say is 'The President is a crook,' and 'General
Ford' is a liar,' and that's not poetic. You don't want to give anybody any space to say 'Well she
didn't mean that. (149)'" This is not to say that her opinions on her social surroundings shouldn’t
be seen as affirmative and conducive to her critique and solutions on the state of the black
community. This statement is drawing attention to creating a poetic space to discuss the
unexposed levels of oppression of blacks, not a space on deciding whether or not blacks are
oppressed. That statement also means that she is critical of the term "politics", and the space of
politics, like feminism purposefully excludes a black woman's participation and perspective.

71
Structurally, this stanza gives insight to why poetry best demonstrates a womanist politics
and the importance of keeping activism and its dialogue community based. Giovanni translates
the oral tradition through poetry because, as she stated in her interview, [p]oetry always gives
you that space, you could take it either way, or one, or two or three or four ways. (149)"
We had discussed how Giovanni mirrored both Spillers's and Holland's idea of the black
woman as a passage. Giovanni goes on to explore the tradition of the black women's body by
illustrating the negative and positive images of the passage. She does this by simultaneously
exploring the use of the body (as Holland had mentioned "materially" and "linguistically" (43))
through the uses of "I" and "Us". In other words, linguistically, when Giovanni uses "When I
die" as a prefix to her wishes and request, she removes many of the social barriers of
communication the black female body symbolizes in racial and gender hierarchy. Having these
requests at her death, is a way of maintaining remembrance through passing beliefs and actions.
Yet, the limitations in her request for the fbicia ('"maybe they") suggest that she's staying realistic
about racial encounters to her community and about the solutions to achieving black liberation. A
major solution to the achieving social equality for the black community is for the people in the
institutions to "take a day off," or physically remove themselves from the ideologies of the
institution. Those people need to confront their part in oppression and realize that what
institutionalized racism does is take the responsibility away from the individual participants. The
"maybe" symbolizes that while this solution is possible, this cannot be forced upon by Giovanni
or anyone in the black community because of the power dynamic in American racism. In
American racism, the black American represents social inferiority; so how can one be forced to
change their mindset by someone they consider socially and intellectually inferior, especially
when their inferiority has been instituted in every canon? A black person's presence is not the

72
fool-proof option to deconstructing racism. To think that its just the physical presence of a black
body that triggers a racial dynamic insults the importance of black community fighting for
liberation; it also limits the black identity to physical mass that is at fault for its own oppression.
This was proven in the institutionalizing of the "Jezebel.20" The way Giovanni writes the
communication between the "I" and "Us" demonstrates why the tradition of black women as
passage aids in defining a womanist. The "I" has a wish for the better treatment of "Us."
Giovanni exists in both, as a living person and in spirit (death) The "I" can communicate with the
"Us" because Giovanni uses the idea of limitless space of a spirit to illustrate her self-defined
identity. Death in this stanza mirrors what Kalenda Eaton would later state is one of ideologies of
the womanist movement: "By using literature as a form of activism, the black woman writer's
insider position and stake in the eradication of injustice enables her to negotiate
multidimensional experiences (ie black /woman/ partner/ writer/ activist). For women fighting
against sub-alternative, writing and political activism are not mutually exclusive" (9).
"They" is a pronoun that suggests that an action is being done. Grammatically, "them"
cannot be followed by a verb, yet Giovanni uses both 'they' and 'them' to describe the two types
of white people in this poem. Giovanni defines the space for "they" as determinant on what they
will or will not do for 'us'. Which means that while "they" can choose to ignore 'us,' the 'us'
existence in the line is somewhat dependent on the actions of 'they'. She then compares that
20

There were many political and medical pamphlets that tried to claim how the "Jezebel's" uncontrollable sexual
nature put white men out of a state of their control or that the only way to "tame" the Jezebel was sexual
'restraint'. Coincidentally laws were being legislated claiming that it wasn't illegal for a black woman to be raped
by her slave master or any white male. A major example was State of Missouri vs. Celia case in 1855.Celia, a
slave was charged with murdering her slave master when attempting to defend her self from being raped (as she
testified, he had serially raped her over the course of her life, and at the time of this rape she was both pregnant
and ill). While the state had laws that protected women from rape, the courts had declared that Celia was not the
"woman" classed in those particular laws. She was found guilty under the statement "If Newsome (the slave
master) was in the habit of having intercourse with the defendant who was his slave,...it is murder in the first
degree." Celia was sentenced to death in December 1855, after she had given birth to her child. In
1661,Virginia's a paternal law was changed, stating that if a child of mixed race was born, it would take the racial
identity of the mother and that a white father had no paternal bonding to the child.

73
encounter with the encounter between "they" and "them." What's noticeable is the distance
between "they" and "them" in that when discussing their relationship each pronoun has their own
lines, their own space. More specifically, notice that line 14 ("as they did") is an affirmative
action conducted without the existence of an object to do the action on. She is exposing how
racism in institutions works, if they oppress one, it is to protect another (vice versa). 'Them'
stands alone to possibly create a visual on space and privilege; that group is alone in opposition
to how the 'us' is crowded. Meaning, 'them' is not burdened with knowing that its existence
works in relation to another existence. They're space is not interrupted or limited. Giovanni 's
14th line above it gives "them" its own space to protects its social power. As Higginbotham
mentioned in "Metalanguage of Race," "[w]hite law and public opinion idealize...and enforce the
protection of white women's bodies, the opposite is held true for black women" (257). Another
way that space is protecting the social power of 'them' is having the line above act as a visual
divide from the 'us'. In a way Giovanni creates that divide to establish how the 'fbicia'
institutionalizes a racist 'development21 of space.
In her 1998 critique, Not Just Race, Not Just Gender: Black Feminist Readings, Valerie
Smith states that "black feminist inquiry is a site of critique that challenges monolithic notions of
Americaness, womanhood, blackness, or for that matter black womanhood" (qt. from Griffin,
494). Unfortunately, critics like Valerie Smith used this statement as a preface to how her claims
of the role of the contemporary Black Feminist. The method is to establish a way of reading
black women's writings that would distinguish black feminist/womanist text from the "open
myriads of opinion," locating traditions that demonstrated a "sophistication" worthy of
acceptance in the academic study of black women (Smith, xv). The problem with this method is
21

Earlier, I discussed the architectural "developments" of racialized space with the example of government housing,
other examples of this type of development is the prison systems and higher education.

74
that it (as mentioned in the Gwendolyn Brooks chapter) [1] insinuates that being a member of a
specific academia is what qualifies one to define proper traditions in a political movement that
was created for the inclusion of the whole black community. In the case of womanist literature,
receiving an education that follows a Eurocentric tradition of criticism should aid in exposing the
class and race divides that exist in higher education because its history of racial oppression is as
active as Giovanni's 'fbicia.' These critics are just appropriating the image of a black community
as limited in intellectual thought, and thus need an academic to decide the relevance of their
experiences. These critics should be discussing how education has been accepted as a divide
within the community rather than aiding the reductive images of black thought and aesthetics. [2]
That ideology also discredits Womanist and black feminist poetry writing to target the black
community as a whole. The institutions of higher education, enforced the image the black
community as a lesser "other." These institutions rarely acknowledge black literature, especially
black women poets of the 60's and 70's as equal participants of American literary studies. For
Black Feminist critiques to have the same attitude validates that idea of black literature. On the
other hand, out of fear of marginalizing black women writers, Black Feminist critics looked to
avoid identifying the womanist ideologies in these poems completely. Carole Boyce Davies
argues in her book, Black Women, Writing and Identity: Migrations of the Subject (1994), that
because the spectrum of black women's writing is not fixed to a particular location and definition
of nationality, she claims that these works "should be read as a series of boundary crossings" and
therefore black women's writing of this time should only be considered "Black Women's
Writings [as to] redefine identity away from exclusion and marginality"(4). I agree that black
women's literature crosses boundaries on fixed identities; however, I believe Davies was missing
the point in the case of womanist poetry. For example, In "When I Die,", the moments of

75
ambiguity (Us, They, Them) are deliberately placed in the structure of the poem as a means of
critiquing and challenging 'space' as it applies to the personal and social construction of the
black feminine identity.
Nikki Giovanni uses her poetry to deconstruct the ideologies of racism and sexism within
the contemporary liberation movements. Her poetry threads the literary and social tradition of
black women's bodies, constructions of space for progress and oppression, and the womanist
theory of double consciousness as a means of providing health for her identity as well as the
black community. She acknowledges the social progresses made by black women before her, and
looks to reconcile (while critiquing) the gender divide within the black community. Her
criticisms of the feminist movement demonstrate just how important reclaiming a feminine
identity is for black women and for reclamation of the Black American family dynamic. As
scholar Nikol Alexander-Floyd says it best, "[the image of the] black family has functioned as a
prime source of resistance to oppression." I believe Giovanni's ability to better examine and
articulate the tenets of her aesthetics aids in a better study of the later routes black women's
liberation would take once Walker took the aesthetics and critiques from works like Brooks,
Clifton, and Giovanni and entitled it "Womanism."

76

Conclusion
Where Do We Go From Here?
The Africana Womanist term was created by Clenora Hudson -Weems in 1981. Taking on
the ideologies that were more or less suggested in the womanist text, Africana Womanist prose
articulates its qualities and aesthetics in an 18 point system. The Africana Womanist bases her
principles around the contemporary Afrocentric tradition. The womanist, as I discussed in this
project, looked to establish a space for their black feminine identity that was often ignored or
silenced in the racial and gender liberation movements of the time. The womanist was
establishing her space in a time where these women were criticized by both the Black Nationalist
Movement and the Feminist Movement. Since the womanist was not a separatist, her ideologies
suggested a civil compromise in the form of being a "traditional universalist." The womanist
looked to define her space within and around the spaces that already established a political
agenda. Educating these spaces of activism was a necessary move for the womanist because she
saw the betterment of herself in relation to her community. Community activism for the black
women meant being hands on and inclusive in organizing pro-active protests and establishing a
progressive consciousness. This non-separatist attitude was also instituted as to not cap the
history of black women's activism in America. The womanist reintroduced the topic of the black
family being the epicenter of political action.
Womanist literature focused on articulating the use of the black women's body to pass
traditions and identities that existed in and out of the black community and articulate the social

77
spaces that defined the black community. The womanist was reclaiming her body and her
identity in attempts of re-establishing the black community. She looked to reconcile and separate
herself from the traditions of abusing the black body that was instituted during slavery. While
black women have been doing this since emancipation, the womanist at the time of the early 70's
wanted to make certain the plight of the African American woman was articulated in the
academic study of American history. Establishing a tradition within the American academy
breaks the myth of the African American being the racial "other." Also locating a tradition within
the American academe meant establishing an American identity. The Feminist Movement and
Black Nationalist Movement were making ground in the academic discourse; the womanist was
not about to become the "other" in a time where black men who were oppressed were reclaiming their national and intellectual identity.
What Brooks, Clifton and Giovanni did was articulate the issues concerning the womanist
while establishing this discussion as part of the American/classic literary tradition. This was their
route of joining the community in to the academic forum. Brooks used her notoriety and fame as
a poet to teach the black community as well as establish the issues of the community into her
traditional poetic eloquence. Lucille Clifton too, used poetry as a way of bringing the community
into the overall academic discourse. However, her articulation of her poetic process
demonstrated the importance of constructing the African American consciousness. The black
woman's reclaim of her identity and understanding of how her consciousness works in different
environments is necessary if she is going to properly educate the black community about
progress. Clifton's poetry suggested an emphasis on legacy; this includes a legacy in black
progress. As the black woman's history in activism transcends trending social movements, so
does the history of the community she fought for/with. Her poetic process called on her

78
awareness of her duality in consciousness in the form of the "I"s: the "I" that was personal; it
held her aesthetics and a space for her identity as she saw it. The "I" that connected her with her
community; it touched on the shared experiences and oppressions that joins her with her
community. Then the "I" that connected all human beings as she reminds us that a personal and
cultural identity exists in all humans. This consciousness, that's particular to black women, is
what aids in writing works to engage the community to address their own consciousness.
Giovanni's work symbolized the bridge forming between the womanist and her Africana
Womanist contemporary. Giovanni's work illustrated both a need for space and a critique on the
use of "space" in the African American experience. Her poetry and work begins to touch on the
metalanguage of race and oppression, which is extremely important to the Africana Womanist.
These poets, and the writers like them, established a space for a more in depth critique on the
blacks woman, black family, and community politics.
One of the major factors that I believe aided in the Africana Womanist aesthetics,
particularly that they see themselves as "unique and separate from" black feminism and
womanism (Floyd, 1), is a reconciliation with the black men of the Black Nationalist Movement.
While Walker's collection of womanist prose wasn't published until the early 80's, most of her
womanist prose were written in the early 70's. The "Africana Womanist" was conceived and
articulated long after the failed attempts of the male oriented Black Nationalist Movement. The
idea that black women were fighting for their space was no longer treading on a larger movement
that was aimed at uplifting the black community. Nor was there any movement looking to
publicly chastise the black women for being concerned about her womanhood. Men of the
Nationalist movement who were now major investors in the academy were openly supporting the
mission of the Africana Womanist. Former black nationalists C. Eric Lincoln, Charles V

79
Hamilton (who co-authored "Black Nationalist Classic") and Robert L Harris - who stated that
Africana Womanist provided "much healing... for men and women of African Ancestry and
ultimately for all caring men and women" (Floyd,1) - were all praising the Africana Womanist
for her uncompromising plight to seek a space for her black womanhood (2). The black
community had witnessed the failures of misogyny in black solidarity; moreover institutions
enacting racial oppression became ever more relentless in the black community in the late 70's
and 80's; the black community were witnessing oppression by social and economic neglect.
Black women still being vocal, I believe, was a beacon of hope in restoring black community
from the failures of the nationalist movement and the oppression that came after it. Weems's
Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves (1993) was received favorably by the National
Council of Black Studies. This was social freedom that the womanist did not have; but their
spacial foundations allowed the Africana Womanist to formally explore the womanist ideologies.
In other words, the womanist critique on the need for space and the legacy of the black women
reserved a space for future women to have this discourse beyond the trending movements that
might have occurred before.
Another element that was crucial for the Africana Womanist was the Afrocentric
movement that was occurring. Molefi Kete Asante (who helped lead this movement) stated that
Afrocentricity is the "belief in centrality of Africans in post modern history...On the basis of our
story, we build upon the works of our ancestors who gave signs toward our humanizing function
(qt. in Keaveny 466)" The Africana Womanist sets her inclusion to the Africana woman and
Africana male only. This attempt was to explore traditions of the community that exceeded
beyond the middle passage. This allows for the African American experience to be seen beyond
its beginning point of slavery. In ""Come Colour My Rainbow": Themes of Africana Womanism

80
in the Poetic Vision of Audrey Kathryn Bullett," Marueen Keaveny and Ronald J Stephens
explain the use of Afrocentrism as a method of Africana Womanism:
As a method, Afrocentricity focuses on the process of centering or
locating oneself in his or her culture and history (Bekerie, 1994, p.131).
With the process of centering, the individual becomes subject rather than
object of examination. Thus as a tool for oppressed people. Asante's
suggestion of using the Afrocentric method extends beyond a focus on
Africa as the seed of history to a process of centering oneself in one's own
culture and history. (468)
The Afrocentric method of centering oneself in their own culture and history relates to the
African American's relationship with the academy. As it will be further explained, one of the
Africana Womanist's key tenet is self-defining one's space and identity because using words that
are associated with ones oppression further instills the oppression of the conscious. The
Afrocentric method calls for making sure that ones intellectual community is central to African
Diasporic studies. Rather than placing the black community in historical and literary traditions of
the American (Eurocentric) academy, there should be recognition of a separate Afrocentric
academy. The Afrocentric academy stands for reconstructing the social and literary aesthetics that
are considered primary and traditional. The Africana Womanist believes "the traditional
Eurocentric epistemological and ontological foundations have been critical in silencing and
denigration process of non-Europeans in the United States as well as throughout the world"
(Keaveny, 466). The Africana womanist not only looks to create a space for the Africana
woman's voice but to also re-construct the language in which we discuss race and identity.
The metalanguage of race is another crucial tenet for the Africana womanist. The first of
the 18 African womanist characteristics is agency of self-naming (Floyd,3). The term "nommo"
was employed by Assante to refer to power of language and words to construct reality. As
Daphne William Nitri notes, "naming is too critical an act to be left in the hands of the dominant

81
group" (qt. in Floyd, 3). According to the Africana womanist identifying one's self in relation to
their oppressors' language suggests that that person identifies him/herself with the oppressive
images constructed by that same group. If black literature looked to establish itself in the
Eurocentric academy then they are casting themselves and their cultural traditions within the
marginal space of lesser importance. For Africana womanist studies, articulating the maintenance
of the oral tradition is an example of holding on to African traditions. It is important that the
Afrocentric academy is established because the oral tradition is "perceived as less "true" by
Western European standards" (467). For the Africana womanist, the literature must address
characteristics of their tenets in order to further establish an Afrocentric academic discourse.
The 18 characteristics of the Africana Womanist, and her literature, are as follow:selfnaming, self-definition, role flexibility, family centeredness, struggling with males against
oppression, adaptability, Black female sisterhood, wholeness, authenticity, strength, male
compatibility, respect, recognition, respect for elders, ambition, mothering, nurturing and
spirituality (Floyd 3).
Sonia Sanchez's poetry has seemed to host this reconciliation between the self and the
misogynistic patriarch that oppresses both in and outside of her community. Her poetry is
centered in unifying the community while possessing imagery that illustrates the complexity of
black women's sexual identity as to remove it from the reductive roles of promiscuity or asexual
maternity. The tone of her poetry does not try to bring the community into the academy, it rather
suggests that the history of the community is expected to be seen as an academic topic of
discussion. Sanchez, like the Africana womanist, has remained rather militant and still maintains
a slightly nationalist perspective when speaking of and to her community. Her 1978 book of
poetry I've Been a Woman: New and Selected Poetry contains poems that suggests a redefinition

82
of an academy that is strictly centered to an African American or Afrocentric tradition. In
"Blues," Sanchez puts the critique of the black women's sexuality in a dream; this dream state
questions the reality and legitimacy of naming and identifying. She begins the poem:
in the night
in my half hour
negro dreams
i hear voices knocking at the door
i see walls dripping screams up
and down the halls (lines 1-6)
Sanchez has established that the following will exists in "negro dreams," allocating this
experience to the African American community, and more specifically the African American
subconscious. The image of "voices knocking" and "walls dripping screams up/and down" might
refer to the objectivity of black people by having objects take on humanistic qualities of suffering
("dripping screams"). Sanchez's use of " I"("I hear" and "I see" ) is stressed which could suggest
that it's her particular consciousness that can illustrate the objectivity of the black experience.
Having the poem take place in a dream state can also reflect the characteristic of "authenticity,"
especially because she also questions the idea of external constructions on her consciousness in
this alternate reality:
won't someone open
the door for me? won't some
one schedule my sleep
and don't ask no questions?
noise. (7 -11)
"Won't someone open" is written to the right of the margin which suggests an outside force not
associated with Sanchez's subconscious. Yet the question that's being asked is whether she wants
this external construction on her identity to happen? Also, if this external construction is a
positive or negative thing? But the second question asks for this external force to create her sleep
schedule without asking any questions. I think that this calls on the characteristic of "male

83
compatibility" and "role flexibility." Meaning that Sanchez is aware that being in the "negro
dream" means that part of your (sub)consciousness will exist with counterparts of your
community, but participation does not mean taking over (hence "don't ask no questions").
To some respect, the 18 characteristics are extremely womanist. However what the
Africana womanist does with these characteristics is use them to separate themselves (Africana
Womanist) from the previous black women's movements. These characteristics have not only
existed in the womanist aesthetics but in prior black feminist movement and black women's
liberation movements. The African womanist seems to separate herself from the history of black
women that had laid foundations for their very own ideologies; because the analysis of language
is not centered around a maintenance of a "general" African tradition. I believe is an extremely
reductive concept, seeing that Africa as a continent has over 250 languages spoken, there is no
one central tradition for an entire continent. That is not to say that there isn't a shared ancestral
history with black Africans on a diasporic level. However, the idea that black Americans should
not establish an American identity - after participating in the building of this nation, the creation
of its aesthetics and popular culture, as well as its scientific, political and artistic contributions to
the country's foundation for over 400 years- applies the same racist idea that black people in
America are incapable of having a national identity in their own country of residence.
Weems claims that Africana womanist looks to address and critique issues within "white
feminist, black feminist, the African feminist and the Africana womanist. (1)" Moreover she
claims that contemporary Africana womanist needs to be even more critical of the Africana
womanist ideals; as Floyd demonstrates:
Although Hudson-Weems correctly identifies racism in the mainstream
feminist movement, the master narrative underlying Africana womanism uses
White feminism as its primary point of reference and neglects the contributions of
Black feminists in critiquing White feminists' racism. Such treatment reinforces

84
prevailing notions of the women's liberation movement- that feminism is the
cultural property of White women and the Black women who support its tenets
are less authentically Black- and deprives readers of a much more complex and
nuanced [black] history... Africana womanism is a type of standpoint theory that
fails to account for the diversity of Black women's experiences, even while
claiming a special right for Africana womanists to speak for Black women. (5)
While Africana womanists have more room to expand the discourse of Black liberation and
womanhood, the separatist attitude mirrors the faults of the Feminist and Black Nationalist
movements that caused womanist to construct a space in the first place. "Womanist" is a term
used to described to the cross-generational history of black women fighting for racial and gender
equality. The womanist writers of the early 70's were not looking to speak for the community,
but to demonstrate the inclusivity of voices needed to truly enact change for the Black
community, and maintain that change for generations to come.

85

Work Cited
Alexander-Floyd, NIkol G. Revisiting "What's in a Name?": Exploring the Contours of Africana
Womanist Thought. Thesis. University of Nebraska, 2006. University of Nebraska, 2006.
ProQuest International Academic Research Library. Web.
Allan, Tuzyline Jita. Womanist and feminist aesthetics: a comparative review.. Athens: Ohio
Univ Press, 1996. Print.
Andrews, William L., Frances Smith Foster, and Trudier Harris. The concise Oxford companion
to African American literature . New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Print.
Baraka, Imamu Amiri, and William J. Harris. The LeRoi Jones/Amiri Baraka reader. 2nd ed.
New York: Thunder's Mouth Press ;, 2000. Print.
Barnett, Bernice McNair. "Invisible Southern Black Women Leaders in the Civil Rights
Movement: The Triple Constraints of Gender, Race, and Class." Gender and Society 7.2
(1993): 162-82. Print.
Bloom, Allan David. The Republic of Plato. 2nd ed.New York: Basic Books, 1991. Print.
Brooks, Gwendolyn. Beckonings: poems. Detroit: Broadside Press, 1975. Print.

Brooks, Gwendolyn, and Gloria Jean Wade Gayles. Conversations with Gwendolyn Brooks.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2003. Print.
Clifton, Lucille. An Ordinary Woman.1st ed. New York: Random House, 1974. Print.

Eaton, Kalenda C.. Womanism, literature, and the transformation of the Black community, 1965-

86
1980 . New York: Routledge, 2008. Print.

Domash, Lynne, Suzanne Juhasz, and Nikki Giovanni. "A Talk with Nikki Giovanni." Frontiers:
A Journal of Women Studies 1.1 (1975): 146-50. Print.

Franklin, V. P. "Hidden in Plain View: African American Women, Radical Feminism, and the
Origins of Women's Studies Programs, 1967-1974." Journal of African American History
87 (2002): 433-45. Print.
Giovanni, Nikki. The selected poems of Nikki Giovanni . New York: William Morrow and Co.,
1996. Print.
Greasley, Phillip A. "Gwendolyn Brooks: The Emerging Poetic Voice." Great Lakes Review 10.2
(1984): 14-23. Print.
Griffin, Farah Jasmine. "That the Mothers May Soar and the Daughters May Know Their Names:
A Retrospective of Black Feminist Literary Criticism." Signs 32.2 (2007): 483-507. Print.

Henry, Taylor. "Gwendolyn Brooks: An Essential Sanity." Kenyon Review 13.4 (1991): 115-31.
Print.
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles A. Murray. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure
in American Life. New York: Free, 1994. Print.
Hernton, Calvin. "The Sexual Mountain and Black Women Writers." Black American Literature
Forum 18.4 (1984): 139-45. Print.
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. "African- American Women's History and the Metalanguage of
Race." Signs 17.2 (1992): 251-74. Print.
Holland, Sharon Patricia. Raising the dead: readings of death and (Black) subjectivity. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 2000. Print.
Hooks, Bell. Feminist Theory from Margin to Center. Boston, MA: South End, 1984. Print.
Jackson, Kenneth T. Crabgrass Frontier: the Suburbanization of the United States. New York:
Oxford UP, 1985. Print.
Jimoh, Yemisi. "Double Consciousness, Modernism, and Womanist Themes in Gwendolyn
Brooks's "The Anniad"" MELUS, Poetry and Poetics 23.3 (1998): 167-86. Print.
Malewitz, Raymond. ""My Newish Voice": Rethinking Black Power in Gwendolyn Brooks's
"Whirlwind"" Callaloo 29.2 (2006): 1-13. Print.

87

Moody, Jocelyn. "About Lucille Clifton." Welcome to English Â« Department of English,
College of LAS, University of Illinois. N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Apr. 2011.
<http://www.english.illinois.edu/maps/poets/a_f/clifton/about.htm>.
Pryse, Marjorie, and Hortense J. Spillers. Conjuring: Black women, fiction, and literary
tradition. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985. Print.
Phillips, Layli, and McCaskill Barbara. "Who's School Who? Black Women and the Bringing of
the Everyday into the Acadame, or Why We Started "The Womanist"" Signs;
Postcolonial, Emergent, and Indigenous Feminisms 20.4 (1995): 1007-018. Print.

ii
Richard, Flynn. ""The Kindergarten of New Consciousness": Gwendolyn Brooks and the Social
Construction of Childhood." African American Review 34.3 (2000): 483-99. Print.
Rowell, Charles H., and Lucille Clifton. "An Interview with Lucille Clifton." Callaloo 22.1
(1999): 56-72. Print.

Spillers, Hortense. ""All the Things You Could Be by Now, If Sigmund Freud's Wife Was Your
Mother": Psychoanalysis and Race." Boundary 2 23.3 (1996): 75-141. Print.
____ "Mama's Baby, Papa's Maybe: An American Grammar Book." Diacritics; Culture and
Countermemory: The "American" Connection 17.2 (1987): 64-81. Print.
Stephens, R. J., M. Keaveny, and V. K. Patton. "Come Colour My Rainbow: Themes of Africana
Womanism in the Poetic Vision of Audrey Kathryn Bullett." Journal of Black Studies
32.4 (2002): 464-79. Print.
Walker, Alice. In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens:Womanist Prose. San Diego: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1983. Print.
Wheeler, Lesley. "Heralding the Clear Obscure: Gwendolyn Brooks and Apostrophe." Callaloo
24.1 (2001): 227-35. Print.
White, Deborah G.. Ar'n't I a woman?: female slaves in the plantation South. New York: Norton,
1985. Print.

88

iii

