Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

But A Walking Shadow : Stories
Charlotte R. Benbeniste
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Benbeniste, Charlotte R., "But A Walking Shadow : Stories" (2011). Senior Projects Spring 2011. Paper 44.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/44

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

BUT A WALKING SHADOW

CHARLOTTE BENBENISTE

But A Walking Shadow
Stories

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College
by
Charlotte Benbeniste

Annandale-On-Hudson, NY
May 2011

ACKNOWLEGEMENTS

To my four closest friends, who, by some stroke of luck, continue to
tolerate me,
To Celia Bland and Karen Russell—one of my first mentors, and one
of my new mentors—for so willingly offering their time and insights,
To Mary Caponegro, whose belief in my writing this project is so
indebted to,
To Brad whose precise eyes, understanding, and incredible patience
kept the fire burning under these stories for an entire year,
And to my mother, whose year introduced into my thoughts the
fodder for much of these stories,
I offer my endless gratitude.

Author’s Notes
The characters in these stories are all fictitious.
Pages 2-3 of Hollywood Forever feature text directly from the Hollywood Forever
Cemetery.

to Jacqueline Bao, whose very large shadow I continue to walk in,
these stories are warmly dedicated

CONTENTS

1: Boogie Nights
2: A Different Kingdom
3: Indian Summer
4: Atlantic City
5: Hollywood Forever

Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.

-William Shakespeare, “Macbeth”

Boogie Nights

It was four in the morning and Boogie Bloom couldn’t sleep. For hours he had found
himself caught in that cruel and particular junction of restlessness, where his ceaseless thoughts,
his inclement body temperature, and his pillow’s inability to get cold intersected. He sat up on
the one bed of the Bloom household, a bouncy thing the syrupy hue of cough medicine and
wondered, in varying lengths of time, about the sequencing of the last two songs he had played
that night, the potential proximity of one’s hand to a fly before it bolts, and of the woman who
had rung the station at eight forty-six that evening.

Wakefulness was Boogie’s constant companion, his frequent visitor, and over the years,
through methods motley though equally strange, Boogie had learned how to expel this
nettlesome guest when it had overstayed its welcome. At first, he had jumped jumping jacks
and they had worked marvelously. But years of smoking left him quickly out of breath, and all
the gasping and wheezing would lead his mind quickly to the thought of death, and Boogie
would lay in his bed until the sun rose, pondering his own mortality. He felt ridiculous, anyhow,
throwing his arms up and down and flailing about like a teenager.
Afterwards, a woman he had been seeing at the time forced him to drink Valerian root,
but he couldn’t stomach the stuff, couldn’t stand the smell of it, and even after he broken things
off with her, that foul smell lingered on his pillowcases and made him sick at night. Acupuncture
had been suggested to him, but after a brief stint with junk, he had acquired an acute fear of
needles. Now only one thing would suffice, as it had sufficed unfailingly over all the years,
Boogie’s only fail-proof remedy: a drive to the Pink Elephant and a fifth of whisky.
Boogie got into his car and found a parking ticket on the windshield and a thin layer of
early morning dew dotting his leather seats. He had forgotten to put the top up. He turned the
wipers on, the heat up, and put the car into drive. His toes warmed and his head went cold while
a feeble wind blew the ticket and the remaining white strands of Boogie’s hair aside in his
periphery.
A faint impression of the quarter moon still dallied above; the slightest hint of the sun
began to reveal itself; the few small clouds overhead radiated a wan morning glow; but the sky,
with all its miscellany of light was scarcely so resplendent as the earth. Small pieces of silver
seemed to glisten in the street beneath his headlights, and the wide roads of Los Angeles were
paved with a glossy brightness. Boogie loved this time of day, when the streets were
unburdened with the cars that for most hours weighed down on them, when the fuzzed glow of
the neon signs hit empty pavement, when the city seemed to loosen, and he could move through
it, unbridled.

And so he drove, out of the canyon, bracing the brakes as he slid down the steep hills,
humming country tunes. He recalled their lyrics in incorrect order, but jumbled as they were in
Boogie’s somnolent mind, they still maintained that frank and shameless aching that he loved
about country music, a simple sincerity in the songs that he could always trust, the certainty
that no one was tricking him. Had the weather and the women of Nashville agreed with Boogie,
he’d have stayed to fulfill his childhood fantasy of becoming a honky tonk star, but with an equal
hankering for rock ‘n’ roll and easy girls, he had moved his show to Los Angeles nearly twentyfive years ago, bringing along with him that same country candor that he found so hard to come
by in Southern California. There was no radio in Boogie’s car, not since he had broken it,
anyhow. His was the only tolerable station on the air, and unable to stand the advertisements
for his own show on the hour, every hour, Boogie had smashed it in one night some years ago.
Now he drove past the haciendas, fiddling with the heater and murmuring songs about tender
hearts and big hair.
Until the very end, that night’s show had gone quite like they always did. Boogie
arrived at five ‘til five, much to Larry the station manager’s constant irritation, exchanged a
glare with the idiot who played jazz in the hour slot prior to his, and got settled in his chair and
headphones where he would remain for four hours.
“You’re late,” said Larry. He was wearing a black band T-shirt band, and blue jeans that
he had torn himself.
“Can’t win ‘em all, Lars.”
Boogie swiveled around in his chair and drummed pencils onto the mixing desk,
answering phone calls from teenage boys who called him possessive names of presumed mutual
maturity, “My brother,” or “My man,” and listing off trivia about rockabilly songs in that
familiar worn drone of his. Coming up on the fourth and last hour of his show, the station phone
rumbled and lit in the studio. It was eight forty-six and there were fourteen minutes left in
Boogie’s show. He stared at the phone nearly bouncing off of the table and hated it, its useless

rotary, the yellowing white paint that cracked off from its body, the way it seemed to jump
when it rang. Boogie would have been happy to end the show with the three songs he had cued
up, indeed, the thought of cutting even one for a phone call felt unholy. But Larry’s voice
sounded in Boogie’s head as loudly as the phone: his more-than-mild urgings to be more
personable, the tacit threat that lay in his suggestion to “be the Boogie they hired!” Boogie’s
only recollection of that man was that he had intentionally greasy hair, that he was uncouth, and
that people had loved him for it. The phone came up on its final rings, its death rattle, and
Boogie answered it.
“This is Rock no Talk. Boogie Bloom here. Who am I speaking to and what do you
want?”
“Hello?” There was a woman on the other end of the line.
“Yes, dear, what’s your name?” He called all women dear. It was perfect, really. If they
were girls, he established the age-dynamic between them, creating a necessary distance while
not entirely nullifying sexual potential. And if they were older, as this woman was, he made
them feel young again, that single word alone conveying his years of experience, his grooming,
and the certain safety they would feel with him.
“Wanda.”
Her voice was saccharine and high-pitched but not pitchy and there was a forced calm in
her reply. Boogie could tell a lot from someone’s voice. Of all exchanges, those vocal had been
his only currency over the years. He could understand things about people’s natures from their
pauses, from the depth of their breath, from their particular intonations.
“Hello Wanda, what can I do for you tonight?”
“I’m calling to tell you something that I’ve wanted to tell you for about a year now.”
“Sounds serious.”
“It is serious.”
“Lay it on me, my dear.”

She took a long and slow breath in. Boogie could hear from the slight rumbling in her
inhale that she smoked.
“I think, no, well, I’m quite certain of the fact, that, I’m in love with you.”
Boogie had started to receive calls like this. His show had never seemed to have so many
active callers, and it gave him a fortifying confidence that people out there were still listening,
until he remembered that Larry had fired the man who had screened the phone calls into the
station. Some were pranks, some were callers uncertain of what else to say in the rush of the
moment. But an earnest silence followed what Wanda had said. He could hear her sincerity, that
this wasn’t a prank, that she meant it. Normally when he received calls such as these he replied
with the obligatory “Love you, too,” a hearty laugh, and then he’d hang up.
“You are, huh?” he replied, in a tone somewhere in between teasing and genuine
curiosity.
“Absolutely.”
“But we don’t know each other, Wanda.”
“You may not know me, but I know you very well, Boogie.”
“You—”
“I listen to your program every day on my drive home from work, I work in Hollywood
and live in Santa Monica, and drive during rush hour, which means I spend two hours in my car
everyday. Which sounds hectic, right? And it used to be, it really did, and it used to get lonely,
but then we started doing the drive together, Boogie.”
“Sounds like you’re an avid listener.”
She was, and had been since Boogie had started his show. Wanda worked at an old and
popular open-all-the-time diner on Sunset Boulevard, that served their hamburgers and frenchfries in thin cardboard foldout boxes shaped like ‘64 Corvettes—blue for boys and pink for girls
or older ladies with youthful aspirations in the facial region— and where the waitresses wore
rollerblades and had their hair in pigtails, as mandated by the uniform. Wanda was fifty-four

and wore her hair in pigtails to work. Pearly and bright, the diner had red fake leather booths
embroidered with white fake leather diamonds that sandwiched fake-enamel tabletops with
nickel-munching jukeboxes on them. Most days, all days, really, Wanda skated through the
diner with trays carrying cardboard cars and malts listening to the music chosen on a whim by
the hungry or bored or drunk or most times all of the above. Every now and again, a song that
Wanda liked played, but it was over almost as soon as it started.
“I am. I really am. I listen to you everyday,” Wanda said, exasperated.
When her shift was done and her feet were sufficiently swollen and she had left her
day’s worth of roller skate skid marks on the pearly white floors, Wanda drove home. It was her
time with Boogie, whom she trusted to soothe her ears, to undo what had been done by the
hungry, the bored, and the drunk. Sure, someone else was choosing the tunes for her still, but
here she got to choose who chose for her, and she chose Boogie, time after time.
Eight minutes were left of his program. If she stopped talking, he could fit in one full
song, and the majority of the second with a smooth fade-out. But there were no signs of Wanda
slowing down, and the excited widening of Larry the station manager’s eyes meant not to cut
her short. Their conversation would fall into the category of what Larry called “the jooj.” Radio
Juju was anything that, in Larry’s opinion, gained listeners for the station. Boogie had never
needed any sort of jooj in the past, nor had the station. He hated the thought of it. Larry was a
fine looking man, generally polite and adequately groomed, his sartorial misguidance aside. But
when he spoke of the “jooj,” the word seemed to seep out through his teeth, yellowing them as it
slid out, the horrible thing.
Boogie’s car screeched to a stop at a dimly lit intersection. In the car beside his, a
middle-aged man with a handsome jaw turned the knobs of his radio. And turned and turned,
still unrestingly he turned the small knobs. The man looked up at Boogie, and then down again
at the knobs, the synthetic lights of the control deck casting a faint but warm shadow around his
eyes. Piles of thumb-worn files were stacked high on his passenger seat, and he sipped from one

of the two open cans of soda in the center console. The reflecting light and the buzzing sound
from the stereo seemed the only imbecilic hope in the mighty forlornness of the car.
Boogie had come to prefer red lights to green ones. He felt they weren’t paid enough
attention. Or when they were paid their due attention, it was as the menacing pauses to the rush
of the day. But a kinship could be formed here, at these red lights, an expediated intimacy. The
red light was the drivers’ common enemy. It was the enemy like the tacit potential of death was
to passengers on an airplane, like the long line was to those who stood in it. They hated the
enemy, together, and in this unified loathing, an unprecedented candor availed itself to them.
The unspoken acknowledgement of these relationships merely as a fleeting dalliance and the
overwhelming possibility to never again encounter one another allowed for a particular kind of
freedom—the shorter the time period, the more candor permitted—for frankness, for wildness.
He’d seem some memorable things at red lights, but this morning, at this red light, he imagined
himself there with Wanda, the two of them sitting side by side, in their own cars, her listening
to him, him thinking of her, turning to face one another through the windows, still completely
ignorant of their proximity to one another.
It was a fair bet to assume they’d crossed paths before, in the literal and not the
figurative sense of paths crossing. They lived in a huge city, second most populated in the
country. And it was vast, all four hundred and eighty three square miles of it, so large and
stretched that a resident was at home and a guest all in one city. Four main surface roads ran all
the way East-West underneath two highways that did the same. Depending on the hour, these
roads either reminded a driver or helped him to forget the city’s immensity. Chances were that
he and Wanda had faced one another, for seconds or even whole minutes, depending on the
hour, inching forward or speeding in opposite directions on opposite sides of the highway.
The red light hadn’t changed colors, hadn’t even flickered, for what seemed like over
two minutes now. The man in the car next to Boogie’s had started to plead with it. With the
rare exception of those rushing to a death-bed, these red lights were ultimately inconsequential,

and yet a fair amount of energy was exhausted at their expense, pleading and fidgeting, tic
tocking. The light turned green, and though the man was staring straight ahead, he took some
time to notice. In an instant, he was gone, as Boogie released his own break.
The phone call had ended that night with Wanda in tears.
“God, that was pathetic,” Larry had said to Boogie with an excited smile in the parking
lot outside of the studio that night. He had a bumper sticker on his car that read Jesus Was Asian.
Larry was not. He was in a sort of frenzy. He had loved the phone call, the course it had taken,
the real heartbreak Boogie had dealt the stranger, and that a whole city might listen to a woman
making a fool of herself, caught up in fantasy. Unrequited love was so often dismissed as a
juvenile delusion. But Boogie was of the opinion that this was love of the purest sort, a love
unencouraged. Solitary love was the most difficult.
If Wanda had seen him on the street, she wouldn’t have been able to recognize him.
He’d been on the radio for twenty-eight years now, and about twenty ago, had stopped allowing
pictures of himself to be taken. Boogie was handsome as a young man, with the stick-straight
flaxen hair of an American pure breed and earnest brown eyes, deep-set beneath eyebrows with
a relaxed sort of arch. His youthful self-acclaim had lead to the end of these wholesome features,
his rosy cheeks now reddened and inflamed, as though stricken by gout, the lids over his
elliptical eyes seeming never to fully open, the pores on his forehead enlarged and darkened by
dirt and sweat and a diminishing hygienic zeal. There was a common saying that some people
had a face for radio. Boogie’s had not been, he had had the face television anchor, with a
pronounced jaw and spotless teeth. But his invisible time behind the microphone had given him
a face fitting of the medium. And now the only images associated with the voice everyone knew
so well were those of him as a spirited young man, with sun-warmed skin and an attractive
smile.
Boogie parked and walked towards THE PI K ELE HANT and the pink elephant
painted on the store’s cement exterior holding three hearts of pink and red with a pink bow on

its head stared at Boogie and Boogie said “hello” and saluted the elephant and entered the store
where his nostrum awaited him.
Boogie curtsied and greeted the clerk, pulling the tails of his partially buttoned flannel
shirt out to the sides so they looked like the flying veil of a nun’s habit: “Heya Steve,” said
Boogie to Steve, and Steve saluted him and said “Hey Mr. B.” and then asked him if he’d like the
usual, to which Boogie’s reply was “yes.” Steve turned to the shelves behind the register where
the nicer bottles were stashed to fetch his whiskey, while Boogie scanned the aisles for anything
extra that he fancied that morning, peering through the clear bottles, seeing his eyeballs in the
mirrors on the walls, magnified by the liquor and the glass. The store was unusually full for that
time in the morning.
“You got it, Mr. B.”
At five-thirty in the morning, the replay of Boogie’s evening show buzzed through the
shop. Boogie strolled the familiar aisles in a big jean jacket with sheepskin around the neck and
warm, slouchy boots he was beginning to think were made for women. An old woman and a
younger woman who was not young walked hand in hand through the aisle. The first song he
had played that night—a blues standard reworked in a later decade by a prominent folkie came
through feebly on the shop’s speakers. The old woman began humming along, and the younger
woman stamped her feet, with more energy than that morning’s hour would suggest possible.
He wondered if this was Wanda. She seemed to know the words, and was enjoying the music.
The song ended and he heard his voice, recalling the name of the song and the moniker of the
man who’d written it. He’d always wanted a blues name—some force of nature and then his
surname, some adjective depicting his musical prowess—“Thunder Boogie Bloom,” Boogie “Sly
Cat” Bloom.
“All ready for you, Mr. B,” called Steve from the register. “Good show, huh?”
“Watch it.”

Steve made him nervous. He knew who Boogie was in a town where no one else could.
Boogie looked at him like the son he never had (he had one, but via his weekly visits to the Pink
Elephant, he saw Steve more frequently). With his cheeky little remarks and his insistence that
he was in on the joke, Steve threatened Boogie’s dear and safely guarded anonymity. It was a
gift seldom found in this city, something Boogie had come by as if by accident, this faceless
fame.
“Fifth of Turkey.”
Boogie said thank you, and curtsied goodbye, a broken button on his shirt scratching his
palm as he grabbed its tails and got back into his car. He jimmied the engine and the exhaust
pipes rattled and the heater let out a foul smell and the windshield wipers squeaked and the
headlights flashed on and off and then on again and soon the gas pedal gave way and Boogie’s
foot fell upon it and off he went down the driveway of the Pink Elephant and onto the streets of
the city which boasted its own edifice, the whole thing, with its beachside mansions and its eastside slums, its well-manicured gardens, the flyer-littered neon streets, the roads so full of cars
you’d think they were parked, it all seemed like a set. It was a trinket museum and itself a
trinket, this city of his.
Drivers were beginning to fill the streets, those particular people who made the crosstown drive. He stopped at a red light, falling unwittingly out of his early morning stupor, and
looked over at a woman, somewhere between sleep and wakefulness, wearing a pantsuit and a
face that resembled his ex-wife’s. She applied makeup in her mirror, faultily, wiping her eyes and
drawing a dark line across her eyelid once more. Boogie watched her become progressively
frustrated. She took it out on the car: first on the mirrors—slamming the foldout mirror shut,
adjusting, furiously, her rearviews, her sideviews—then on the dashboard, turning the heat on
and off, rolling down her window, clicking from song to song in a frenzy and finally giving up
control of the whole thing to the radio. Was this Wanda? he wondered. He considered asking
her for directions, just to hear her voice. He remembered Wanda’s well. Boogie heard his own

voice coming from inside her car. His voice had lost its charm, there was nothing sweet in its
tone anymore. She looked at him with a wince. She seemed to think he was checking her out.
He supposed he had been staring. He imagined the look on Wanda’s face, as he was now calling
this woman, when he told her who he was, and how she’d regret the wince, and how she’s gush
all excitedly and apologetically to him, and how he’d forgive her and tell her to call the station
again right as the light turned green and he’d speed off and she’d sit there, stunned, with a line
of people honking behind her which she wouldn’t notice because she’d just seen the face of
Boogie Bloom. The light turned green and the woman drove quickly away and Boogie turned
left.
Boogie parked his car in the same spot that he had taken it from only a few hours
earlier. He fiddled around in his jacket for his keys, keeping his hands in the padding of the
shearling that lined the pockets. He climbed up the stairs to his apartment, keys in one hand,
whiskey in another, the bottle open and meeting his mouth every few stairs, like an athletic
drink. He thought about his show replaying that morning, and of the people—few as they may
have been nowadays, or at least, for Boogie’s sake, at this hour—listening to him, unknowingly
tuned into the same station, on different sides of town, like pushpins on a map, or like flickering
impressions of torpedoes coming up on the circling radar of a submarine. He wondered if
Wanda was listening, if she was beautiful, her face as foreign to him as his was to her. Boogie
neared his bed and, placing the bottle on his bedside table, noodled himself beneath the sheets.
They were cold again and so were his pillows and Boogie fell asleep with ease, as the sun began
to rise outside.

A Different Kingdom

Charles descended the airplane onto the runway, the hot cement warning the soles of
his feet, which was a portion of his body he had seldom paid attention to, but now could not
ignore. A dry breeze swept southwest from the Bosporus and the air filled with the smell of dead
fish and jet fuel, as wide-necked men with thick and gristly mustaches removed his baggage
from beneath the plane. The sun threw its glare over the plane’s curve, and Charles watched the
fading shine of jet fuel on the runway.
Outside, lines of cabmen attempted their various seductions—shouting, baritone
coaxings, wild hand gestures. These were the men whose produce came to them by donkeydrawn carriages, who prized their spear guns and flippers above all else. The ones whose
childish apprehensions of masculinity were modeled after the John Wayne they had seen in
open-air cinemas, and whose brawn and width made Charles uncomfortable, he himself housed
neatly in a thin frame, with long arms and long legs with little definition, and beardless cheeks
with a chest that matched.

Charles slept for the most of the drive to Cesme, coming in and out of sleep with the rise
and fall of the hoarse voice on the radio. He located his aunt and uncle’s house from the memory
of the small brown fence that circled it.
His aunt Renee greeted him at the door.
“Charlie!” She rolled the Rs of his name with a Turkish rumbling of the uvula. She had
aged considerably since he’d last seen her, but was still very beautiful with fair-freckled skin
that housed placid sky-colored eyes and short, coarse, red hair that fell by her chin. They
dropped his bags at the door.
His uncle arrived as Renee led him outside for a drink. Moreno kicked down the stand of
his bicycle with a jug of juice in his hand. He was horizontally enlarged, and vertically reduced
and his growing belly squeezed against the handlebars of his bicycle as he dismounted it. They
sat in a triangle, sipping cold pomegranate juice while Charles answered questions about his
younger sister, the weather at home, his forehand, his backhand—he hadn’t had much time to
play over the last four years but talk of tennis was one of the few places where he and his uncle
found common ground. He was teased about his slowly maturing good looks and questioned
about his recent academic accolades.
“Your father says to me that you pass con maxima alabanzos. Summa Cum Laude.”
“Si,” Charles replied with a feeble smile. His uncle’s Spanish was better than his English
so when they spoke it was often like this.
“Para no tiene tempo para tennis?”
“Estudiando mucho.”
His uncle paused.
“No puedo vivir solo hasta el cuello.”
It was something he had heard his father say to his mother when he was a boy. It meant
“you can’t live from the neck up.”
“How is your mother?” Renee broke the silence. “Your house, has she finished it yet?”

The last time his aunt and uncle had visited, Charles’s mother had been adding a section
to their already very large house in California. His father had worn a tie at the dinner table, had
shown them his new car and had fixed them vodka gimlets from behind the bar in their living
room. To Renee and Moreno, it seemed as though his mother had remodeled the house and his
father as well.
His father was a hard worker and had spent most nights of Charles’s childhood in the
office, to build the spectacle of their house, to send Charles to private schools, to give his
children the things they wanted, and still he begrudged the house and the woman who lived in
it, and could take no part in the felicity of his son’s intellect, finding him a stranger all the more
as a result of it. It was as though his parents were still playing that cute game that new parents
play in front of their friends, naming the infant’s features as their own: “my eyes, his ears,” “her
lips, my nose.” If Charles’s parents were to play that game with him now, his mother would
claim his mind, and his father would take whatever was left. When the conversation stilled,
Moreno suggested that Charles settle in and that they take a swim.
The room that Charles would stay in for July was once his father’s. When his
grandparents had died, and Charles’s father had moved away to California, Moreno and his
young wife had stayed nearby and made it their home for the summer. The room was the
smallest in the house. It had a low ceiling and a small bed in the corner with a thin quilt over it
that looked scratchy and two small windows with wide ledges underneath them that had
accumulated dust and chips of cracked paint. Charles tossed his bag on the bed. The windows let
in a lot of light and the room was bright and hot even though the fan on the ceiling was
spinning. He wiped the dust off the ledges beneath the window and off the countertop of the
short dresser in the room and unpacked his clothes and some of his things—a few t-shirts in one
drawer, a pair of slacks and a pair of jeans in the next, a dinner jacket on the hook behind the
door, a pair of sneakers and a pair of sandals under the bed, his swim trunks, which he laid out
on the bed to change into, and from inside the padding of his socks in the center of his suitcase,

three Russian novels which he stacked on the dresser, an old postcard which he propped over
the books, two magazines that he hid beneath his trousers, and a photograph of Charles and his
mother on graduation day, in an ivory frame that she had given him. He put on his swim trunks
and rejoined his aunt and uncle outside.
They climbed onto their road-bikes and set off for the Aegean, speeding through
unpaved rows of one-storied houses, lined up side-by-side, divided neatly by short stonewalls.
White-bearded shoe polishers sat behind gilded booths with brush-tops and carvers loitered by
their rotating spits of meat, behind red neon signs, while their sauciers in burgundy caps waited
absently by their sides.
The pedals of Charles’s bike spun faster and faster, hitting the backs of his ankles as he
rode. He fell behind.
“Desde su tacones!” yelled his uncle from up ahead, for Charles to push from his heels,
“Legs!” he yelled again.
They reached the sea and locked their bikes together, one on top of the next. Charles
looked out at the water. He had never experienced any natural affinity to the sea. Nothing
pulled him towards it, as though the its briny water ran through him or constitution some
portion of his body. He hated how the salt bound itself to the hairs on his legs and how when it
dried it made him itchy while he read on the beach and how all of his things seemed to smell
acidic afterwards, and he how he found it hard to focus on anything, even to focus on not
focusing with the clanking tongs of the men who sold boiled corn from large buckets near the
shoreline. But his uncle insisted he go in, that it was good for his hair and his skin and for his
sinuses.
He walked in knee-deep and then farther. Moreno was a few feet ahead of him, splashing
about and throwing himself against the waves and then under them. His uncle loved the sea.
Charles watched as he maneuvered onto his back, the salt’s buoyant hand carrying him above
the sea’s eddying whirl. His stomach protruded up above sea level, like the fin of a shark.

Charles bobbed through the waves, mouthfuls of seawater leaking from his mouth and nose. He
positioned himself side-by-side with his uncle, their shoulders colliding from time to time as the
current shot through the water. Moreno’s skin felt soft and cool underneath the water, nothing
of the rough carparace that clothed him while on land.
Charles floated on his back, looking up at the spotted sky, trying to enjoy it. The sun
warmed his skin and the water underneath him, and at that precise moment when the
temperature of Charles’s body matched exactly the temperature of the sea, his skin seemed to
evanesce, and he felt translucent, like a plastic container for his bones floating about in the
water. His ears were submerged beneath the surface, and all Charles could hear was the sound of
the current and of his own breath.
The day had exhausted them all, and when Charles returned home with Renee and
Moreno, lead-footed and sleepy, they each retired to their own rooms to nap off the rest of the
afternoon. When night fell, he awoke in his bed of scratchy sheets, and hunger sounded from his
belly. His aunt and uncle were snoring in unison from the next room, so Charles laced his shoes
and set out for a bite to eat.
The night air was warm and agreed with him. He walked past the rows of neon signs.
Strings of beach balls were roped together and hung beside their bearded vendors in long
braids. The lights illuminated the beach balls, and as Charles strolled by them, they lit his path,
like a series of clues.
He picked one of the restaurants that all looked the same. A man in a white linen
jacket—whom, from his puissant eyes, the large ring on his index finger, and the spectacles
hanging from a strap around his neck, Charles deduced was the owner— sent a young man in a
suit to seat him. With a smile, the man walked Charles to his table. He was hungry, and
finished a large plate of food very quickly. As was the custom, he ordered a Turkish coffee after
dinner, and while he drank it, mindful of the grit that would remain at the bottom of the cup, he
watched as the owner stopped from table to table to greet his customers. The man lingered at

some tables longer than others, sitting down with the regulars, smoking a new cigarette at each.
As his eyes followed the owner, he saw that the diners around him had turned their cups, mouth
down, into the small white saucers that had accompanied them.
By the kitchen, the owner spoke to a young woman. They bore a striking resemblance
to one another, not in any particular feature, but in their general countenance. He sent her out
into the dense crowd, and she began moving to the tables whose cups were down-turned in their
saucers. She would pull up a small stool next to them, sit down, pick up their cup and peer into
it for a short while, running her fingers through her dark hair, before looking up and speaking
to them. He watched her carefully, as she squeezed her broad hips between the narrow spaces
between the tables, and shrugged her shoulders up to her ears so that her arms forced her
breasts together. She was large and had the shape of a woman, though she could have been no
older than Charles.
Methodically she moved, table to table, turning cups and talking. The cups were her
draw, and Charles wanted her at his table so when she came near, he too flipped his coffee cup
over into its saucer.
As she approached, he started to get warm, perspiring at the nape of his neck, the
manicured strands of his hair that had been neatly combed into place were now falling into his
eyes. He started running through lines of poetry, as a reflex, but none suited the occasion, the
majority of them being about dead girls. She finished with the two women at the table next to
his and turned towards Charles, eyeing him and then the cup, her eyebrows rising for
permission to approach. He smiled at her, or hoped he had. He could hardly know now, though
he must have communicated something because she was pulling her stool up. She sat down and
said one word, “fortune?”
He had never bought into these sorts of things, these necromancies. But not wanting
her to leave, and hardly capable of fashioning an answer with the certainty he wished to project

to her, he pointed to the cup and nodded. When she sat right in front of him, he could see that
she was even younger than he had originally thought, she could be no older than seventeen.
The girl reached across the table and positioned his hands in front of him, with one on
each side of the saucer. She picked up the cup in her own dainty hands, her long fingers stroking
the cooled porcelain as she turned it to face her. The girl peered into the cup, and he peered at
her.
“You’re going to tell my fortune?
She turned the cup towards him to reveal what she had been staring at. The remaining
coffee grinds had dripped down the walls of the small cup and dried into different shapes, a
caffeinated set of hieroglyphics.
“Yes,” she replied, “from these.”
She spoke very slowly and with a heavy accent. He asked for her name.
“Idil”
He repeated it back to her incorrectly.
“Idil. Ee Deel.”
“Idil,” he said to her again and this time she seemed satisfied.
“Charles,” he said back.
“Charlie.” He didn’t like it, but hadn’t the heart to correct her.
Her English was broken but he understood her hands, her fingers as they waved
through the air, while she revealed to him what his cup foretold. She pointed into the cup, at a
dark glob with wiry extremities.
“See?”
“Yes, I see it.”
“You see what it looks like?”
“Coffee.”

Idil pointed up to a tree and flapped her arms, up and down, and up and down again, her breasts
bouncing together and then apart as she moved. He understood it to mean “bird” but maintained
the puzzled look on his face, so that she might keep flapping and bouncing about.
“It’s a bird,” she finally said.
“There are birds in my future?” he asked with a smile.
“It means voyage, you will go a place that is different.”
He looked around and then at her, noting the accuracy of the first prediction. The next
shape that she pointed to looked just as much like coffee to him as the first one had.
“What does it look like?” she asked him
“I don’t know.”
“I help you.” She interlaced her fingers together and pounded her locked hands gently
over her chest. Her breasts went bouncing again, and she started to laugh. It was this that
endeared him to her so, her own self-oblivion, her laugh ringing truer to a child’s in the
excitement of a game of charades than to a woman in the middle of a seduction.
“Heartbeat?”
“Heart, yes,” she replied quietly.
He knew what this symbol meant and needed no further explanation.
“Do you know of a place to get a drink here? A bar?”
“Yes, there is many bar here.”
“You can show me?”
She paused.
“Yes, I show you, no problem.”
“Now?”
“Fortune,” she replied and pointed to the cup.
“There’s more?”
“Only one.”

“All right.”
They were leaning over together, to look into the cup, when the owner shouted from
the kitchen.
“Idil!”
He circled his arm around his head, his hand in a fist but for his index finger pointing
up.
“Yalla,” he shouted again.
“I go now, but you will wait for me around the corner?”
“Can’t I wait here,” Charles asked?
She didn’t answer but only looked back at the owner.
“Understood.”
Charles waited around the corner, in a little nook area where two roads met behind a
street lamp. He sat and then squatted and then sat again, waiting for her. Some time later, after
what felt like a few hours, but mustn’t have been more than one, Idil came around.
“You are hiding!”
He was about to explain himself before he realized that she was being coy.
They reached a nearby bar. It was crowded with young men in shorts too short, young
women in skirts too long, and middle-aged men ignoring their leathery wives. There was one
seat open at the bar and Charles sat on it and Idil sat on Charles. She ordered for both of them.
He could now feel the full berth of her weight, her wide behind pushing through the side slots of
the bar chairs and straining the circulation of his legs. But as his thighs went sandy, into the
prickly sensation of a youth having sat Indian-style past his legs’ capacity, the warmth of her
body penetrated his skin. The barman arrived with two tall glasses filled shallowly with a clear
liquid and two cubes of ice bobbing in its center. It smelled like dark licorice, which he hated as
a child and still hated. Idil was holding a small pitcher of water in her hands. She poured the
water into the glasses, and when the thin stream hit the shallow icy liquid, it billowed up to the

lip of the glass and clouded into a murky opal. It smelled of anise and the taste of it burnt
Charles’s throat as it went down.
He was full of food and they had been drinking for some time. Charles had no sensation
in his legs and was perfectly content having her on top of him, her elbows digging into his
stomach as she turned to reply to him, her muscles contracting and releasing on top of his
thighs, the way his arms swept across her breasts as he reached for drink at the bar. Yes,
Charles was happy to stay in that position for some time. But the barman soon shouted
something in Turkish and Idil told Charles that it was time to go.
Out they went into the night, out into the neon dream of the street, hand in hand, a
chained helix conducting a feverish energy, an uncouth eagerness, doubt and certainty together
at once in some happy dizziness. They walked down the road, their bodies seeming to illuminate
the streetlights as they passed them. And for small moments they were spotlighted, fleetingly
ethereal under the lamps as they moved.
When they reached it, nothing but silence and the crickets bowing their legs together
came from the house. The front door was equipped with surprisingly well-greased hinges, and
he and Idil made little sound as they moved from the front of the house to the room that Charles
would call his for the remainder of the month. Idil walked into the room first and when Charles
shut the door behind them, the quiet sound of it fastening in place filled him with selfsatisfaction. He turned from the door and Idil was eyeing the room—the few personal
ornaments of his own that Charles had placed in its corners and on its shelves, and on its
smooth tabletops to give it some false semblance of familiarity— a small ivory frame from his
mother, the set of Russian novels he had brought from home, a bent postcard of John F.
Kennedy.
“This is your family?” she asked, looking into the frame at the photograph.
He nodded at her.
“This is your mother, the woman in the hat?”

“Yes”
“She is very beautiful,” she said, as she ran her fingers along the white frame.
He moved to undress her, fingering the thin straps that dug into her wide shoulders, her
neck a sudden victim to his prurient gaze. But she stopped him, preferring to undress herself,
the room turning into her theater, Charles fixed as a young boy beneath a short Church-play
stage, wide-eyed and curious, his eyes following her arms as they moved to reveal her beige
skin. She pulled out of her dress in precise and methodical tugs, slowly working the fabric from
her skin, melting away the sweaty fixative that bound it to her body. In nothing but her
underwear, Idil’s body was as new to her as it was to Charles, her near-nakedness a power
perceptible to her, but still unbridled. A clumsy and clownish smile on Idil’s face at once
revealed small gaps in between her front teeth, and the bashful reflection of Charles’s awe of her
bare skin. Indeed, her body had a magnificent effect on Charles. His was incapable of producing
the same visceral warmth in Idil. If she could revel in the pallid tone of his skin, in his wan and
hairless chest against hers, he imagined it would be for the novelty of it alone. She stood before
him, palatial and statuesque, her thick ankles at last caged in her cotton underwear. He moved
towards her, and soon she lay beneath him, and they lay beneath his coarse sheets, all eight of
their limbs in a splendid vigor as the crickets’ chirp unified into a lulling hum.
In the morning Idil was gone. Charles lay in bed, a solitary calm his only bedfellow. His
stucco walls glowed yellow in the mid-morning light as he remained still in his sheets, watching
a small beetle walk slowly across his ceiling. When he emerged from his room, the house was
empty. A note in a wide cursive laden with foreign characters peeped out from under his bare
feet. His Aunt and Uncle had gone to the market and had left him directions to the local Bazaar:
a series of lefts and rights, Ls and Rs, at street names he couldn’t pronounce.
He returned to his room to get the appropriate clothes, opening and closing the drawers
in his dresser to remember where he had left his shirts. As he searched around the room, he
noticed something missing. His picture frame was gone. The books remained, and the postcard

was in its same position above them, but the picture frame was gone. He remembered the way
back to the restaurant. If she had it, he would go to retrieve it.
On the road, Charles biked the dirt path beneath him with a newfound ease. Unimpeded
by the bumps in the gravel, the large stones that would hit his rusted wheels and throw him up
into the air for fragments of seconds now became rhythmic little joys. At each jump he pictured
himself momentarily floating: the earth spinning rapidly beneath him and himself floating
weightlessly above its ether, untethered by gravity, a brief citizen of the air and not the land.
He sped by the ocean, past the houses, the shoe-shine, the meat carvers and the hungry
beach toy vendors, past the ice cream shops and the small drive-in theater, all the while the sun
meeting the peaks of his face, burning his cheek-bones and the bridge of his nose. He turned
onto a familiar street, into the rows of restaurants that luck, if he believed in it, had lead him to
the night before. Bald men were loading glass cases with ice and newly dead fish, once baited,
now bait.
He quickly approached the end of the row, where last night’s restaurant sat in all of its
retrospective majesty. He was like a bottle-rocket, the hope of seeing her bubbling
uncontrollably from his stomach, its heat gradually enlivening the particles from his gut to his
ears. He reached the restaurant and his eyes scanned wildly for any site of his spotted girl. But
she wasn’t there. Instead he encountered the owner, her uncle or father or cousin or whoever he
was. The man issues his commandments to a small army of waiters around the tables, himself
meticulously straightening cutlery, arranging napkins, fastening tablecloth clamps and chairs as
he shouted.
He saw Charles, and his sporadic eyes swiftly focused, widening and rounding with
recognition and seeming to darken in sudden fury. The owner pointed a raised arm at him and
his already pointed eyebrows angled as he shouted at Charles.
Charles biked faster, peering down at his uncle’s directions though filled with an
instantaneous disinterest in his intended destination—an instinctual sensing of danger

propelling his feet faster and faster at the cracked pedals. He thought he could hear a dog
barking, but when he looked around there was no dog.
Charles reached the Bazaar by some fortuitous accident. He locked his bike to a
lamppost in a hurry and ventured into the tunnel of the Bazaar, seeking sanctum in its frescoed
walls, in the confused maze of the marketplace. Chaos encircled Charles as he walked into the
long tunnel. In some far distance, he could see a dime-sized moon of light at its opposite end.
Smaller tunnels branching off the main path filled the Bazaar with a sense of uncertain risk and
finality at once, the truth and the visage of all mazes, being simultaneously lost and found.
It was as strange a place as he’d ever seen—its ceilings overwhelmed in painted
patterns, geometries in the deepest greens and blues. No surface was left unornamented, each
layer from the roof down, covered. The concave ceiling of the grand hall was lined with
medallions in octagonal flowers and octagonal stars. Beneath them, vendors hung illuminated
glass lamps of similar patterns, besides trays of cubed jellies coated in a matte sugary dust. At
eye level, Arabic epigraphy boasted of the wonders of god, of paradise, of the grandeur of this
place.
Charles walked through this gallery of unkempt glory, his mind ricocheting at the whim
of his eyes, to the men with colorings and builds so unlike his own, to the women whose builds
he could never make our beneath their robes. With things moving so quickly around him, time
seemed to stand still for Charles and soon he had reached the end of the tunnel.
Blinded as he emerged from the Bazaar, his eyes reprocessed the natural light after
nearly an hour beneath the tunnel’s dull glow. All of the figures outside were for moments only
silhouettes, reduced to shapes. As his eyes came to, the face of the owner crystallized in front of
his. The man howled at Charles, but Charles heard nothing, his eyes monopolizing his sensual
focus. He studied the man for an instant: his hair and beard were of a dark chestnut; his eyes,
narrow and ambulant. His entire face, of a fine irregularity, announced a boundless pluck, a
scorn of all things weak. The owner’s only comprehensible word was “Idil.” Her name, again

and again, in between slurred bursts of what were certainly profanities. Charles knew to move,
the same reflexive recognition of danger impelling his feet. But he did not. There was a new
heat in him, dry and suffocating and unfamiliar to Charles, and after another moment, the
owner’s fist swept across his face, the large ring on his index finger brushing against his cheek,
taking with it Charles’ footing and a small scrap of his skin. He was knocked to the ground, the
sun-soaked pavement warming the cold sweat on his shoulder blades as he lay there with
determinate clarity. Settling shadows of the crowd surrounding him shaded out the sun as
Charles shut his eyes.
He got up slowly, with no sense of how long he had been laying there, recalling only the
changing cast of faces that he had seen looking down at him when he had opened his eyes every
now and again from the ground. As he shifted from his knees to his feet, no one around him
seemed to notice, time having rendered his spectacle insignificant. He stepped into the teeming
crowd, anonymous once more, and directed himself towards the water. He moved quickly,
extracting an elemental ecstasy in the fluidity of his strides. The wonderful pleasure of his
ligaments pulling and releasing as he walked was a sensation totally new to him. Before, he had
never noticed, but now, his body’s ability to move this way gave him a sense of boundless
delight.
Charles removed his shoes and walked onto the sand, unbuttoning his shirt as he
approached the sea. The shoreline was cold and wet beneath his toes, and there he laid his shirt
and shoes before stepping in. He maneuvered onto his back. The clouds seemed perfectly
positioned in the sky. The seawater soaked into his hair, and as he ran his hand through it, he
thought of Idil, of her hair marshy with sweat the night before. He moved up and down with the
waves, the water washing over his face, salting his tongue and seeping into the fresh cut beneath
his eye. But as the water stung his gash, Charles felt no particular pain. He felt warm beneath
the sun, the lines of buoys forming patterns around him as he floated unfettered in the maze of
the sea.

Indian Summer

Henry Langham was nearing the end of his life and knew it. Recently widowed, he lived
alone in a large house. The many hours of solitude had at last reached his mind, and Henry was
of a certain whimsy not unfamiliar to people his age. His children rarely visited him but had
bought him a cat. He had named it Manchester, after the city where he was born, and
Manchester spent his days treading the vertical lines of the tennis court outside, where the
young people bearing Henry’s surname had played the first leg of a three round game he had
organized to determine the successor to his company. He didn’t really care much about their
athletic prowess, but loved the sport of tennis very dearly, and had included it in the game of
succession for his own entertainment. He had been the one of youngest in his family, but now,
much since multiplied, some having died off, he was the elder, the wise one, something of a
shaman or a high priest. Though he often felt like a fraud, a terrible failure, for the family he
presided over hardly resembled a family at all.
The glow from the television screen hit his grandson’s face from its place in the groove
in the living room wall. The room was dark, but for a small ashy light that came in from the tall

and partially curtained windows. Theo sat on the couch, in the middle of the room, with his chin
perched heavily on his open palm.
“Category! Potent Potables!” the host exclaimed. He had an oily voice, a tone ideal for
the excited proclamations of imminent triple-doubles, a herald for the sentimental and often
ridiculous names of racehorses and the order in which they were rounding the bend. The
contestants would be going into the final round of the game. Theo asked his father if he could
turn off the television and his father said no, warning Theo that this was “prep time,” and then
walked into the kitchen where something he dropped made a loud noise on the tile, which the
acoustics of the room magnified into a convex echo, something of a cannonade, whose
foreboding sounded throughout the apartment.
Theo was left alone in their living room, watching the end of the show. The final
jeopardy round was a blind gamble, but in one single question, could erase the history of the
game, turning it on its head, leader to loser. Best bet strategies had started to become obvious to
Theo. The leading contestant’s bet was simple: he assumed the second place contestant would
go all in and calculated his bet by doubling second place’s earnings, subtracting his own
earnings from that, and finally, and most importantly, adding one dollar. If both second and first
place contestants answer correctly, the leader will win by one dollar every time. In the game on
the screen, the leading contestant, a middle-aged man with large pores and ginger-colored hair
had garnered ten thousand throughout the course of the game. If he, as most game theories
suggest he should, doubles second place, subtracts first place, and adds the crucial single dollar,
his sole competitor, a thin woman with rimless glasses pushed up very high on the bridge of her
nose, gets beat by one dollar. The show ended and Theo switched off the television and walked
down the hallways to his room.
Two twin beds were pushed up neatly against each lateral wall of his bedroom. Julian
laid on his back, spinning a basketball into the air with a sharp flicking of his wrist.
“Who won?”

“Diner waitress.”
His brother told him to grow a pair, and at this, Theo was silent. Julian was sixteen, a year
younger than his brother, and by some mottle in the way of things, had hit his spurt first, which
Julian had channeled into a pair of respectable sideburns that widened into his cheeks,
highlighting perhaps his most prominent feature, a mandible of cromagnonean proportion. The
extent of Theo’s facial ornamentation was limited to a few hairs over his upper lip and above his
chin.
They were unlikely siblings—one with a head for numbers, the other for words—Theo
could watch the jeopardy game and understand it instantly, and Julian, with a great thirst for
oral history, had put to memory the stories of his grandfather and his three great uncles, or as
they called themselves, The Brothers Langham.
*
The four Brothers Langham— Ernest, Arthur, Henry and Fred—had grown up in
Northern England. Ernest, the eldest, finished his schooling and, after working for a local
butcher for a year, had saved enough money to buy a boat ticket to the United States, leaving
behind his three younger brothers and a promise to send for them when he could. He moved to
Queens and opened a shop that sold knickknacks and the English teas that his mother would
send him in small, labeled jars. Money rolled in and soon, so did Arthur. They shared a onebedroom apartment above the shop for two years, all the while saving their earnings but for the
occasional stock investment.
When Henry had arrived to New York, he had spotted his brothers standing on the
platform as his train from the boat basin approached the station, seeing Ernest for the first time
in six years and Arthur for the first time in three. At the sight of their brother in the window, so
grown, Ernest and Arthur began to cry. The train came to a gradual halt, and when Henry’s
compartment passed the brothers, they ran along side it, jumping up to touch Henry’s hands
dangling out from the train window.

Henry was the mathematician of the family, tactful but full of the eccentricities of a
mind capable of numbers, and under his guidance the brothers invested Ernest’s savings into
small plots of land. By the time the Brothers sent for Fred, Ernest’s fortune had turned from
modest to handsome. When Fred arrived, resentful of his brothers for leaving him alone in
Manchester for so long, he bought a Cadillac with money from the Brother’s shared bank
account. He was left out of the contracts when at long last the Brothers purchased a property
entirely their own, a small apartment building on the West Side of New York City, across the
street from Central Park which they named, appropriately, the Langham. It was to be the home
of the their posterity. The Brothers would accept tenants only until their own spawn was plenty
enough to fill the nine units in the building themselves. While the Langhams multiplied, so too
did their wealth. They named their company The Tetrad.
Now, of the four Langham brothers, only Henry and Fred remained. The family never
saw much of Fred. He had made a significant fortune of his own and squandered the majority of
it funding an autobiographical film entitled “The Playboy.” The Langham was thus occupied:
Ernest’s three daughters on the top floor, Arthur’s daughter and two sons on the second floor
and Henry’s two children and an ever-shifting tenant on the first floor above the lobby, the
building a physical materialization of their family tree.
4A belonged to Janet Langham, Ernest’s eldest, blonde and plain and of the particular
sternness not uncommon of eldest siblings. 4B was occupied by her sister, Lily, who their
father, inspired by her unmatched fondness of all things floral, had affectionately called “Petals.”
4C belonged to Diane Langham, who lived there with her nurse. She was often seen wandering
the halls of the Langham, arm in arm with Ling, mumbling things to herself, loudly and quietly
and then loudly, again.
Arthur’s children lived on the third floor. It’s said that when addicts are rehabilitated,
they replace one addiction for another—cigarettes for cocaine, fast food for cigarettes. Thomas
had replaced Quaaludes with horses and 3A was often left unoccupied as he and his wife

preferred to spend much of their sober time at a ranch in the Hudson Valley. His sister Karen
was an analyst, and 3B doubled as an office. Well past the acceptable age, her son, Alex, a failed
musician, lived at home. 3C belonged to Gary Langham, a portly man with an odd humor and a
deep love of opera. He had two daughters. Audrey, his youngest, had inherited her mother’s
rosy complexion and her father’s build, and as a result, had been eliminated in the tennis match.
Cleo was Gary’s eldest. She had, among other things, blue hair, a passion for Japanese cartoons
and friends who referred to themselves as nuns betrothed to the Marquis de Sade, a cloister in
which she was in the process of joining.
Theo and Julian lived with Michael in 2A. Tensions between the second generation
Langhams spread through the building from the ground up, sometimes insidiously, but often
times not, each floor ruled by the choleric humor, resentful of the one above them, taking to
heart the figurative implications of one man’s floor being another man’s ceiling and for what
they assumed was a better view of the Macy’s Day Parade. Michael spearheaded this vertical ill
will. In 2B lived Pamela Langham-Crowley-Huffington, ex wife to the road manager of an
English band of moderate fame, and mother to a well-behaved adolescent named Spencer and an
incontinent dog named Sandy, who, years from now when the dog would die, Pamela would
replace with a homosexual personal assistant of the same name. Spencer enjoyed speed skating,
and watching women’s television with his mother. He had won the tennis match and was the
popular favorite to win the entire game.
Mr. Orson Foley had no relation to the Langhams and lived in 2C. He seemed to be a
journalist of some sort, though no one could be certain. That the plebian, non-Langham lived on
the second floor did not help Michael’s growing acerbity.
The Langhams worked together and were cordial for the purposes of business, but
rarely spoke outside of the office, save for the occasional nicety when crossing paths in the
lobby. The most talking any of the second generation Langhams did was during the twice
yearly management meeting at Henry Langham’s house in the country, where they conversed

about façade restoration, the efficiency of the maintenance staff, doorman applicants, and
expanded parking.
Each of the second generation Langhams owned ten percent of The Tetrad, as had been
bequeathed to them by their fathers, with Henry Langham holding twenty percent and control
of the company. After this brothers had died, Henry saw it unfit to change how they had plotted
the Langham, which had been set up precisely as a mirror to their familiar structure, eldest to
youngest, top to bottom. But he had witnessed how it had bewildered a family, making these
cousins strangers to one another.
“On the issue of succession,” he had begun the last meeting at his home, in his dry
baritone English accent. Michael waited with an eager grin widening across his face. He was
Henry’s only son, he would inherit the Tetrad and take the best apartment in the Langham.
“I’ve decided the company will pass to none of you.”

The room around Michael felt slow and

contained, a fish bowl, his relatives moving in a sway, like the artificial algae in unnaturally blue
water. “Instead, breaking with the dynastic nature of this family, if you can even call it that, I
leave it up to the third generation Langhams to determine for themselves, through a multi-stage
game, who will take majority ownership of The Tetrad.”
“You can’t be serious,” Michael had said to his father.
“Ah, in fact, I can be, and in this case, I am.”
Michael opened his mouth to protest further, but Henry continued without pause.
“The young Langhams will compete in a three-part game to determine a winner. Each
stage will involve an exam, the first physical; the third, mental; and the second falling
somewhere in the middle. First, they will play a round-robin tennis match, with the possibility
of sudden death. Stage two is a surprise in which I’m certain some of you will learn something
new about your children.”
He paused.

“And finally, stage three. A trivia game that will test your children’s knowledge of
world history, current events, dead languages, ancient ruins, and basic tenants of property law.
Let’s see whose been enjoying my holiday gifts.”
The gifts Henry referred to were these. Each holiday season, the third generation
Langhams received a heavy present from Henry and, while he lived, from Arthur. Arthur would
predictably give each child a volume of British Romantic Poetry, starting them off with
Wordsworth the first year, Coleridge the second, Shelley, and then Byron, and then Keats as
they got older, eventually moving them on to the Victorians, leaving them Oscar Wilde the year
that he died.
Henry, on the other hand, had given them business books. He had started them off with
Beginnger’s Real Estate, subtitled Lets Get Real, and then onto Irrational Exuberance and Every
Landlords Legal Guide. He inscribed every book he gave with the same note: Words go,
Monuments Fall, People Die, Land, however, lasts forever.
*
On a sunny day in October, when the daylight hours were still plentiful and the trees
around Henry Langham’s house were red and orange in Indian Summer, the first round of the
game was scheduled to begin at noon. All six of the competing third generation Langhams had
come to the country with their weekend bags, and their tennis bags, each of which was complete
with two newly strung and gripped rackets, their own can of balls, and each contestant’s choice
of sweat absorbant—for Spencer, a visor; Julian, a headband; Cleo, a tie-dyed bandana with
cherries on it; Theo, a baseball cap; Audrey, a towel, because she would require that much
surface area; and Alex brought a yellowed and torn old T-shirt that smelled like he did.
One of many Langham rites— among which were a blindfolded walk through Central
Park, and the recitation of a verse from book twelve of the Aeneid, in Latin—they had been
playing tennis since they were small, training at the same club in Perth Amboy three days a
week, for three hours at a time. Their coaches were all tanned, all the time. Some had foreign

accents and some had silver chains entangled in their abounding chest hair, and they seduced, or
were seduced by, sometimes it was hard to tell, their older female clients or the mothers of the
children they instructed, the most recent of whom was Pamela Langham.
Stretched, with towels folded over their foldout chairs, the Langhams assumed their
positions for the first match of the game. Alex and Spencer played first.
Alex had an immense talent for the sport, being more naturally inclined to it than any of
his cousins. Spencer wasn’t particularly disposed towards tennis, but was the best player among
the group, training five times a week as opposed to their tree. Spencer and Alex stood at
opposite baselines, the emblems of talent versus drive, separated only by the taught white net.
Alex served, his arm reaching the height of extension, his wrist pronating at a seventy-three
degree angle, the ball racing through the air, invisible to the spectators against the background
of autumnal leaves, eventually hitting the court so hard, and with such quickly rotating top spin,
that it rose from the floor and went sharply to the left, soaring past any possible lunge. Ace.
The Langhams on the sideline, beside the rainbow of sports drinks, clapped that familiar
tennis cheer, that same noble tapping, fingers to outer palm, almost inaudible. Back and forth
zipped the balls, some just grazing the tape, some in parabolic arches, seeming almost to reach
the birds, and still from the sidelines sounded that diminutive tap, the song of formality,
suppressing all reaction, the music of restraint. After losing the first game to Alex, scoreless, it
was Spencer’s turn to serve. The first serve’s ball fell flatly to the floor on Spencer’s side of the
net, but, from that same place of disadvantage, so familiar to him in tennis, landing on the
outskirts of Alex’s deuce side with vengeful force came Spencer’s second serve and his ease into
the game.
Sidelined Langhams watched the balls go from side to side, their heads turning like a
disapproving nod in slow motion, long rallies and quick winners, aces and lobs, and smashes
from the net and from the service line from overheads and reflexive volleys and still sounded the
taciturn hands. Spencer and Alex walked off the court, Spencer the victor.

The second generation Langhams sat in the lawn chairs like boxing coaches, squirting
water into their children’s open mouths, massaging their backs and their egos at once, readying
them to return to Henry Langham’s arena where they’d play out the unclosed and unforgotten
stories of their parents, point by point. Cleo played Julian, a crosscourt duel, her first forehand a
brush top long drive returned by a one-handed backhand, the spectators eyes ticking like the
pendulum of a grandfather clock, watching the neon ball blur into yellow diagonals, each swing
a shot of duty, a front court winner and then the muffled cheer, a down the line undercut and
then that tight-lipped applause, every hit existing outside of the game, the time that Pamela
screwed Karen’s fiancé, fingers to palm in muzzled rage, Michael smashing Gary’s car, and the
gentle clapping once again, the three thousand Gary owes and will never pay, the scar over
Karen’s left eye, backhand to forehand, the overdose in seventy-four, Gary’s unreturned
haymaker, the mailroom terseness, the lobby glowers, the complete and total stalemate, and still
the little claps, tightened wrists and fluttering hands in the careful bridling of all histrionics.
*
The five remaining contestants who had scored highly enough in the tennis match had
reported to the Tetrad by nine o’clock, as Henry Langham had instructed them to. Winter was
fast approaching, no snow had fallen but a thick chill hung in the air. Alex had arrived last, in
sweat pants and a jean jacket buttoned all the way up. He wasn’t wearing a shirt. His hair was
greasy and tousled and he smelled funny, like the inside of an antique shop. Cleo, Julian, Theo
and Spencer took the elevator up to the thirteenth floor. Alex wanted to take the stairs; he was
jumpy, as though he’d been electrocuted, and said it was good for the heart. When they reached
the office, Alex arriving later than his younger cousins, sweatier than before and out of breath,
Henry Langham was sitting in a large desk chair facing the window. They stood there in silence
for what felt like a long time, wondering if he’d heard them come in. Eventually he spun around
and, without greeting them, opened a desk drawer. He pulled out five tick plastic cups, lined
with numerical values. On a table by the door were five glasses of water.

“I’ll need for you each to drink a glass of water, refill it however many times to you see
fit, and deliver its recycled contents in these cups.”
Cleo took the urine cup, dropped it in the woven hemp bag strapped across her chest
and walked towards the table at the door. She raised her glass.
“Cheers,” she said coyly. She gulped down the entire glass, her head tilted backwards,
intentionally leaking a few drops of water to spill unelegantly down her neck. Theo, Julian and
Spencer drank their waters together while Henry Langham spun himself around in his desk
chair with what strength old age had left him.
Alex was the only one left in the office, with Henry and the urine cup and the tall glass
of water by the door. He drank the water, and set the glass back down on the table, saluted his
great uncle Henry, finger to forehead, and left his office with a look so brilliant and grabbing
that Henry, in spite of what his refusal to take the test meant, nearly handed the company over
to Alex then and there.
Henry sat alone in his office. It was a glass box, in the corner of the thirteenth floor,
with two of the walls looking out over the city, eastward to Queens. He thought of the
knickknack shop which he had been told now sold inappropriate toys and leather lingerie. The
room was full of wan winter light, the same pale hue of his skin, which was thin and had lost its
taughtness, nearly translucent now, so that you could see the web of capillaries around his nose
and a bit about his cheeks.
The boys stood at the urinals, rocking on their heels and waiting. With nothing else to
talk about, they talked about the game, though with marked reticence. Things went on this way,
rocking and waiting, until Theo asked Spencer what books he was reading in preparation of the
jeopardy round. When Spencer told him that he had just finished two books on Ancient Mayan
civilization, Theo asked:
“You really think he’ll ask about that stuff?”

“He’ll ask anything he wants,” Spencer snapped back, “You think he cares about
fairness? The only thing that man cares about is Manchester the cat, because Manchester the
cat’s the only one who cares about him. He sees the way the we are, you think this is how he
thought it would be? He’s going to ask us whatever it is that tickles him. Bet on that, ” Spencer
said as he began to pee, feebly and then forcefully, aiming into the cup.
“Avast ye!” shouted Julian, “Stub!” he turned to Theo, “Flask!” he turned to Spencer,
“Thar she blows!” he laughed, amused at his literalism.
Spencer finished and capped the lined cup with the yellow lid. He zipped up and patted
Julian on the back.
“Overachiever,” said Julian, as Spencer left the bathroom.
Julian’s urinal began to sound.
“The point is to get it into the cup, genius,” said Theo to his brother.
“Ah, yes, but I fear grandfather will be displeased with my results.”
Theo’s eyebrows furrowed together and his eyes narrowed into very serious looking
slits. He grabbed his younger brother’s arms and turned them over with considerable force.
They were blank, and Theo was relieved and infuriated at once when his brother told him that it
was nothing serious, just “something green after school.” Then there was nothing in the
bathroom but the sound of Julian’s urine hitting the porcelain and Theo’s hitting the plastic.
“Your cup runneth over!”
“Shut up, Shakespeare.”
“Not Shakespeare, God.”
“Don’t you think that’s a bit of an overstatement?”
“It’s in the Bible.”
“Just give me your cup,” Theo said to his younger brother.
Julian handed his cup to Theo who began to fill it.

“Ah, sweet Theo. Your cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow you
all the days of your life and you shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.”
All who submitted their tests passed. On the day the results had returned from the lab,
Henry Langham announced to the family that he would hold a dinner party at his home in the
country in honor of the remaining contestants. He had telephoned Ramon, the new lobby
attendant, to place the following memo in each of the Langham mailboxes.
SUBJECT: THE FINAL FOUR
PLEASE JOIN ME FOR DINNER TO CELEBRATE THE SOBRIETY OF CLEO, JULIAN,
SPENCER AND THEO LANGHAM.
DINNER WILL BE SERVED PROMPLY AT 7:30 P.M.
H.N.L.
Spencer checked the mailbox that day. His mother was out of the country and he was
alone in 2B with the incontinent dog he had grown to hate. When he received Henry Langham’s
note, he picked up the telephone and called Cleo’s apartment to ask for a lift to dinner, which her
father obliged.
Gary Langham was large and drove a tiny car. Spencer sat in the middle seat in the
back, packed between Cleo and Audrey who had each claimed a window seat. Audrey was
reading a nature magazine about snow tigers and Cleo doodled in the corners of a Japanese
graphic novel. The farther they moved from the city, where the Langham stood in veiled
malaise, the more traffic loosened, and the cars moved with greater ease while an unfamiliar
calm swept over the Langhams.
The older Langhams were seated in their own individual armchairs in the living room
when Henry Langham descended the staircase in a velvet jacket and tasseled loafers. The
second floor of his house was painted white, and no one but Henry was allowed up upstairs.
The third generation coterie sat around a small table in the kitchen, speaking only a little but
taking turns mixing the squares of a Rubik’s Cube they had found in a drawer.

“What are you lot having to drink then?” asked Henry as he walked into the kitchen to
check on the hors d’oeuvres.
Audrey wanted a juice, Theo wanted water, Cleo abstained from drugs and alcohol,
“cloister rules,” Julian was driving, and Spencer wanted white wine, preferably chardonnay.
Henry’s cook had prepared Shepherd’s Pie for dinner. The Langhams sat around a long,
rectangular table and the four large pies were served in glass dishes down the center.
“Would anyone like to propose a toast?” Henry Langham asked from the head of the
table. Cleo raised her hand. “Ah, yes, Cleo Langham!”
“This has meat in it.”
“Yes it does.”
“I don’t eat meat.”
“Well, that’s foolish, dear.”
“Cheers!” shouted Spencer, raising his glass of old pinot grigio.
Henry Langham stood up from his large chair, the only one at the table with arm rests.
“Let’s raise our glasses to the final four. Go on young ones, Holding single or together,
steady moving, to the front, all for us, Pioneers! O pioneers!” he said, breaching his usual
patriotism, “the games have only just begun.”
They all took sips from their glasses and although few clinks were heard from the table,
it was remarkable to Henry Langham how much, in this house, perhaps only in this house, so far
away from the building named to contain them in just this state, they resembled a family.
When dinner was done and the Langhams were full, they sat, each in big armchairs, in
Henry Langham’s parlour, which was very quiet but for the sound of Manchester the cat’s bell
jingling as he weaved around their feet. The room was full of artificial heat, the stale sort that
made all of the Langhams sleepy.
Henry Langham was asleep in the corner. Old, pale and clean-shaven, he began, rather
strikingly, with a great mass of silver-white hair, neatly combed to the side, with thick black-

framed glasses that covered his bushy big-man eyebrows, a small nose reddening at its edges,
thin but well-postured neck, straight torso packed tightly inside his velvet dinner jacket, and
ended, appropriately, in a pair of long and well defined legs, now limp and tucked together, and
feet in the tasseled loafers that he had been wearing faithfully for over forty years.
Diane Langham was talking to Cleo in the opposite corner of the room, telling the bluehaired girl how much she reminded Diane of herself. Some years ago, she had lost the ability to
control the volume of her voice, already a loud and poorly tuned instrument, and as she yapped
away to Cleo, Henry Langham awoke in his armchair across the parlour.
“Where was I?”
He seemed disoriented and for the first time in the competition, its creator looked weak.
“We were deciding a location for the game!” Diane shouted.
“Thank you, Diane. Let’s get on with it, then. In the democratic spirit of these games, I
propose a nomination voting process.”
Michael raised his hand.
“I volunteer my apartment.”
“Veto!” Spencer interjected, “Unfair advantage.”
“Spencer raises a good point.”
“You think I’ll help them cheat?”
“Wouldn’t put it past you,” sounded Julian, who was reclining in poor posture in his
armchair.
“Sit up straight, Julian,” said Henry Langham.
“Thrown to the wolves by my own son,” said Michael.
“In true Langham fashion,” replied Julian.
“It’s their comfort zone, it’s their apartment,” continued Spencer.
“So we eliminate the homes of all competitors.”
“Can we agree to that?” asked Henry Langham.

“Fine,” replied each of them, but not in unison.
“Can’t we just have it here?” suggested Cleo.
This seemed reasonable to the Langhams.
“Absolutely not!” replied Henry Langham, “This is not a place of Langham
competition.”
“But the tennis match was here.”
“That was an entirely different sort of competition, nothing could be more fair than a
game of tennis.”
“Is fairness not a prerequisite of the final round?” asked Spencer.
“The final round of the game will be governed by rules entirely your own. My hope is
that whatever those may be, that they, as a fundament, be fair, but I leave wholly up to you.”
Diane Langham suddenly cleared her throat.
“Since I never experienced the felicity of children, and since I HAVE no real
inVEStment in the game, I believe, believe, believe. I believe that makes 4C neutral territory.”
The third generation Langhams hadn’t been to Diane apartment since they were very
young, when Diane had invited them all over to celebrate her fifty-seventh birthday. Her
apartment was dusty and mauve, and had big plants hanging in the corners and framed
photographs of her father Ernest and the many dogs that she had kept over the years on the
large piano that she never played. That night so many nights ago, it had been decided that a
live-in nurse would move in with Diane after she had attempted to cook a pot roast for her
birthday guests and had nearly burned down the Langham.
After a short deliberation, they agreed that Diane Langham would host the trivia round,
which Henry Langham would plead with Mr. Foley to host, at Cleo’s less than mild urgings.
*
The game began at five o’clock on the dot, when Diane Langham, Henry Langham and
Mr. Foley opened the door, their hands gripping its edge, one on top of the other, a totemic

emblem of what was to follow. The four contestants had been waiting outside, occasionally
ringing the bell and knocking to no avail. Diane led them into the living room, where the piano
still stood in dusty grandeur. Four chairs were lined up in a row, with a fair amount of space
between them. Each had a short, green felt-topped table in front of it, carrying a notepad and an
ink pen. By the piano across the room, a chalkboard found roots in an unreflective brushed metal
frame.
Each Langham assumed their positions. Theo next to Cleo next to Spencer next to
Julian, and Mr. Foley at a lighted lectern in front of the chalkboard. Henry and Diane Langham
sat on a sofa behind the piano looking on at the commencing game.
“Begin?” Mr. Foley turned back to Henry Langham and asked.
“Commence, Mr. Foley.”
“There are three rounds of the game which will proceed as follows. Three categories per
round, five questions per category. The worth of the questions will differ in variants of one
hundred dollars in the first round, which will test your knowledge of world history. The second
round will test your knowledge of real estate, and its questions will vary in increments of two
hundred dollars, and the final round will test your knowledge of various ruins, and its questions
will vary in increments of three hundred dollars.”
Each playing Langham was looking straight ahead at Mr. Foley, in a stale anticipatory
silence.
“The game will function with the same basic rules as Jeopardy, the answers will be read
aloud and the first person to successfully provide the appropriate question will secure the
monetary value ascribed to that answer. Each of your armchairs is fashioned with a buzzer, the
various sounds of which, under the threat of eviction, I have spent the last week familiarizing
myself with. I consider myself a consummate expert on their sounds and thus I must insist my
decisions on the order of their sounding must not be questioned.”
“Can we all agree on this?” asked Henry Langham from the faded sofa behind the piano.

None of the contestants spoke, but, still looking forward, nodded in silence.
“Begin, Mr. Foley.”
Mr. Foley walked to the chalkboard and turned it over in its frame. The other side
revealed a grid mimicking that of the game show, with three headers and five square boxes
below each with the numbers one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, and five
hundred descending vertically. The categories read THE BEST WAR EVER, WORLD
GEOGRAPHY, and MANCHESTER 101.
“Spencer, since you won the tennis match, you chose first.”
“I’ll take The Best War Ever for three hundred, please.”
“ANSWER!” Mr. Foley shouted.
Diane Langham broke out into hysterics on the sofa.
“These two British ships went to Singapore to provide artillery support and to help
prevent the Japanese invasion of what was then Malaya.”
Spencer hit his buzzer.
“Spencer.”
“What were the HMS Prince of Wales, and HMS Repulse.”
“Correct.”
Spencer knew history well and felt an immediate ease with the category.
“Manchester for two hundred.”
“Manchester derived its name from this Roman word, itself Latinized from the Celtic
word meaning “breast-shaped hill.”
Julian and Cleo both hit their buzzers.
“Julian.”
“Mamucium”
“Correct.”
“I believe our responses have to be phrased as questions,” said Cleo.

“Mr. Langham?”
“Yes, Cleo, this is true, but in the first round of the game, we don’t penalize for this
error. Mr. Foley, please remind our contestants of the rules of the game.”
“Contestants, please remember that your responses must be phrased as questions, in
proper grammar.”
“Two hundred dollars awarded to Julian. Pick the next question, please.”
“Manchester for one hundred.”
“This man is said to have erected the first cotton mill in the city.”
Theo buzzed in.
“Theo.”
“Who is Lewis Paul.”
“Incorrect.”
Spencer’s buzzer rang.
“Who is Richard Arkwright.”
“Correct.”
“The Best War Ever for two hundred.”
“This German General was sent to Tripoli ahead of his army to stem considerable
losses.”
“Who is Rommel.”
“Correct.”
*
At the end of the first round, Spencer and Julian were tied, with Theo lagging behind
them, and Cleo with no money at all. Without the necessary score to advance into the second
round, Cleo was eliminated from the game. No Langham was accustomed to losing, and Theo
was no exception from that. From the same place of disadvantage, like Spencer’s in tennis, or
Julian’s in sobriety, Theo was galvanized. In the second round, answering two one hundred

dollar questions about a Walrasian auction setting, two five hundred dollar questions about net
leasing, four one hundred dollar questions about appraisals and two three hundred dollar
questions about development, Theo caught up to his brother and Spencer.
Spencer got anxious. He deserved this. He was the most dutiful grandson, he was the
hardest working tennis player, he tolerated his mother, he was a great student, he at least
wanted to save the whales, he read voraciously, he cleaned up after the incontinent dog, he fed
the homeless that one time, he was the best Langham and he deserved the Tetrad. It was now
Spencer was in that same place of disadvantage once more, aced four times over, this time by
Theo.
Julian was having a glass of water in the kitchen during the small break in between the
second and third round. It was there where Spencer found him, leaning gently against Diane
Langham’s dark marble countertop which was covered appliances and novelty salt-shakers.
“Your brother came out of nowhere.”
“He studied.”
At this, breaking with the Langhams’s long running tradition of inter-familiar stoicism,
Spencer clapped silently no longer.
“I studied, too. I studied harder than all of you. And he was buzzing way too fast, he was
buzzing before the question was even over. Theo cheats, and you should know that about your
brother, Julian. Henry’s right you know? It’s land, just land, that’s the only thing that will last,
not you or me or family or anything just land, and that’s what I’m going to get.”
Julian said nothing. Theo hadn’t cheated. If Spencer was the best tennis player, and
Julian had the best memory; Audrey, the sweetest; Cleo, the sharpest; Alex, the most artistic,
Theo was the most honest.
Mr. Foley called the three remaining contestants back into the parlour for the third
round of the game. The header over the chalkboard read RUINS, with three categories beneath
it: ANCIENT RUINS, GLOTTOPHAGY, and FAMILY FEUDS.

“The questions in this last round before final jeopardy are worth three hundred, six
hundred, nine hundred, twelve hundred and fifteen hundred each.”
Julian sat in between Theo and Spencer. His brother had won the second round and was
asked to choose first. Theo chose ancient ruins, for three hundred, his voice timid and quaking
slightly as he called his selection out to Mr. Foley by the lectern. He answered a question about
Macchu Picchu incorrectly, and Julian sat back and watched Spencer buzz in and proudly
exclaimed: “What is Inca.”
“Glottophagy for six hundred,” said Spencer.
“This language was spoken in northwestern Louisiana. The name is derived from the
Caddo word meaning “brushwood.”
Spencer buzzed in.
“What is Creole.”
“Incorrect.”
Neither Theo nor Julian attempted the question.
“The correct answer is, What is Adai.”
It was Julian’s turn to select a question.
“Family feuds, nine hundred.”
“Brothers Curtis and Preston Blake stopped talking over a debt issue in this sweet
company, which they founded in 1935.”
He buzzed in.
“What is Friendly’s”
“Correct.”
Spencer was still in the lead. Diane Langham was coughing loudly on the couch behind
the lectern, the dust of erased chalk whitening the warm air in the room. Henry Langham sat
cross-legged beside her, tapping her back absent-mindedly with no real care paid to seeing that

she breath once more, watching his grandchildren answer questions about all the things that
wouldn’t last.
Julian hated him. He had forced them all, in the last round of his life, to see them
together, playing tennis in his back yard, eating dinner at his table, petting his cat, gathering at
his office, and all to show them that it meant nothing, that like Machu Picchu and like Adai and
Ayuthaya, and Aka Bo, like words and things, that it wouldn’t last. Land and only land.
If this indeed was the case, if land and only land was most permanent, if this was the
lesson necessary to earn the Tetrad, then Theo, with the least money in the game, but having
won most of it in the real estate round was most deserving of the win. Julian realized this at
once, and in an unforeseen moment of enterprise and affection, answered six consecutive
questions incorrectly, his brother answering correctly each one that he missed, insuring Julian’s
exit from the game and Theo’s entrance into the final jeopardy round.
At the end of the third round, Theo and Spencer were tied with $22,000 each. Theo he
knew the scenario well, he had studied it for weeks. The final jeopardy question was read aloud.
“Ernest Langham met his wife Shirley like this.”
Henry Langham hit a button on a boombox in between his loafers and Diane Langham’s
kitten heels. Julian sat on a chair next to the sofa, watching his brother scribble down the
answer that he was certain Theo knew. Julian had told him the story only a few weeks before.
How in 1955, on a warm Sunday in New York City, Ernest Langham had walked into the 92nd
street Y where a basketball was taking place. Rows of pretty girls sat swinging their feet on the
bleachers, and one short blonde caught his eye. He watched her small feet rock back and forth
against the pale wood, her shoelaces undone, swaying gently from side to side. It was then that
he approached her and asked if he could tie her shoelaces, which Theo’s great aunt Shirley
described as the moment she knew she had met her husband. The thirty seconds of slow
measured music, those few electric notes came to a close and it was time for the two to reveal
their answers. Julian waited eagerly in his chair to see his sacrifice into fruition. The right man

would win. Theo was kind and good, and would restore some order to the family that Henry
had seen unravel. He was holding his notepad tightly against his chest, and at the very moment
Mr. Foley asked the contestants for their answers, Theo looked at Julian on the chair by the sofa
and smiled.
“What is, by tying her shoelaces at the Y,” Mr. Foley read aloud from Theo’s notepad,
and after a short pause said, “That is correct.”
He had done it, much indebted to Julian, who could hardly control himself behind the
piano.
“Let’s see how much you wagered.”
Theo turned the page in the notebook, to the mostly blank sheet on which he had
scribbled down his wager in a frenzy only a few seconds before. As he spun the notebook around
to Mr. Foley, and Julian caught sight of the page, his breath started to slow, the skin on his face
suddenly feeling heavy, seeming weighty enough to anchor him to the floor. His eyes fixed on
one number on his brother’s page, one tiny but crucial number—the perfectly round black zero
at the end of the Theo’s wager. It was a miniscule error, innocent and unforseen. Julian shut his
eyes, and waited. The noise of the game receded entirely, and all he could hear was Diane
Langham snoring on the sofa beside him. Spencer’s notebook was facing Mr. Foley when
Julian’s eyes opened. He held his notebook lengthwise, descending from his grip vertically, page
to spine to page.
Julian looked straight at Spencer’s face, his eyes were wet with delight, his nostrils
flaring uncontrollably above a pompous and toothy grin. As Julian’s eyes moved down he saw
that tweed bowtie pulled so tightly around Spencer’s neck and then the first page of the
notebook which, in curly and feminine cursive read What is tying her shoelaces at a basketball game.
Then came that shiny spiral spine, which connected, in those few loops of metal, the Langham
past with the determinant of the Langham future. There, waiting at the end of the four digits, as

Julian had so feared that it would be, was a straight and well postured one. That crucial single
dollar that secured Spencer as the winner of Henry Langham’s game.
Somewhere among Theo’s polite congratulations and Mr. Foley’s official declaration of
a victor, the chalky coughing came roaring again from the sofa, this time much stronger, more
desperate, and from Henry Langham. The white dust that had floated through the air, as new
categories were written and erased and then written again, had finally settled in the apartment
on the top floor of the Langham like a thin snowy veil. Outside, some stories below, taxi cabs
sped down a wide road along Central Park, their heavy exhaust fumes dirtying the tall banks of
snow as they melted into the grass.

Atlantic City

She asks me again what I’d like to do, the bowtied dealer in a cheap and ugly vest, but
the fat woman beside me is making the most horrible sound, and in the end it doesn’t really
matter whether I hit or stay. The woman to my right is black and fat with large rolls cascading
from her neck through her stomach down to her thick ankles, and she is having an asthmatic fit
or something like that because she is sneezing in the shrillest pitches, as though she were
screaming and coughing in low gutteral huffs, emulating the sonic range of a flushing toilet.
Snot drips down from her nose and splatters over her the ends of waxy black bob, which is
either treated or a wig, and the dealer is beginning to look concerned that she’ll drip onto the
felt. I have a nine and a seven and when I say hit the dealer places a queen on top of my pile and
smiles and says bust. She pulls away my chips and my cards and asks the bald man with the
white friar’s ring and a small white dog in a pink T-shirt that says Sweetie across it in
rhinestones what he’d like to do. He says he has to consult with Ms. Agnes, and after a moment

we all realize he is referring to the dog. The dog barks and the white haired man explains that
Ms. Agnes says to hit, and the dealer places a card down and says that he now has nineteen and
the man says he’ll stay without consulting the dog.
The table is beginning to feel unlucky so I get up because I need to save my singles for
later. The casino floors are magenta and dirty with spilled ash. Hasidic Jews with fur hats and
furry ringlets catcall the underclothed waitresses. The lights buzz a white harsh glow, so bright
and sterile that it seems out of place in this filthy room, keeping these filthy people awake at this
terrible and unholy hour of the morning. Beneath the long tubes of light and fake crystal
chandeliers hang flyers for the Miss Miniature Junior Atlantic City pageant which Jacqueline is
getting her sleep for upstairs. The pageant is suggested for girls between the ages of three to
six years old, and Jackie is eight, but, according to her mother, has premature aging anxieties
and Jackie’s shrink suggested that participating in a younger age group’s pageant would be
useful in calming her gerascophobia. Lisa sees patients on Saturdays and can’t take the time off,
and if the pageant were anywhere else I wouldn’t bother, but they’re here and the little lady
stays at home and the littler lady sleeps in the hotel room on a special silk pillow that she brings
from home to avoid wrinkles, so I have an okay time.
Everything in the casino is of imperial Roman inspiration. The faded burgundy carpets,
the chipped gilded roulette tables, the scratched marble, the waitresses’ velvety crop tops the
color of some conchyllian dyes, tyrian purple curtains covered in dust. It really does look like a
palace. A common misconception is that most time in a casino is spent sitting: eating steaks that
don’t taste good, smoking cigarettes at the twenty-five cent slots trying to make enough money
back for at least two rounds of one dollar Black Jack, losing at one dollar Black Jack. But, in
point of fact, most time in a casino is spent walking. Walking to see what table looks lucky,
what table looks good both in card and clientele, walking off the hundred you just lost at the
table you thought looked lucky.
A group of teenage-looking boys with unnaturally defined jaws who have finally

escaped from the lacrosse field are sitting around a ten dollar poker table ordering vodka shots.
They are all wearing the same polo shirt, each in a different pastel color. And they each have
their collars upturned, and the front most pieces of their platinum hair pointing in the same
direction.
At the next table over a girl in a tiara with a banner across her chest that has a pink 21!!!
21!!! 21!!! written across it. Her friends are dressed up, the girls are wearing pink and purple
colored wigs cut in Go-Go style bobs and the boys are in Stetson hats and bolo ties. They are all
wearing sunglasses. There are a total of ten of them and they each have a camera and they take
a picture of everything that they do. The girls are wearing very tight dresses and split their
fingers into peace signs when they smile on the laps of the dealer at their table, as though he
were a mall Santa. The birthday girl points to her tiara in every photograph that’s taken of her.
One of her friends is very petite and is in the process of draping a black fabric over her head and
over the large format camera she has set up on a tripod in front of her when a security guard
who is grossly overweight and could probably only be of security to someone by sitting on
perpetrators tells her that there is no professional photography on the casino floor.
Behind a waterfall of translucent blue beads, barely clothed women dance on platforms
and the bars are crowded with people who are wearing black and what seem like very
uncomfortable shoes. This area is guarded by the blue beads and by a tall and fit man in a black
suit standing at the bottom of the stairway underneath a sign that reads Exta-C in shiny neon
letters. The guard is bald and the sign makes his head look blue. He asks me if I have a
wristband. I don’t. When I ask him where I might procure one, he tells me not to bother because
I am dressed inappropriately. When I ask him what he means he calls me “bro.”
“Ya wearin’ Khakis, bro.”
I am indeed wearing khakis. They are well made and ironed and pleated nicely, as I
specify to my wife to do on laundry day. My loafers are brown and polished nicely and the
triangular pattern on my shirt is, I am told, quite of the moment. I want to tell him where to

shove that bead curtain. Most of the screwable ladies lay behind that plastic curtain. Perhaps a
group of ripened divorcees, here to celebrate their most recent alimony check. It didn’t matter
really, my standards for trips such as these are never very high, free and consensual are the only
two things remaining on my list and really both of those are potentially negotiable under the
right circumstances.
“Sir, you’re blocking my line.”
“Pardon me?”
“I’m going to have to ask you to step aside from my line.”
As though the line belonged to him. The twenty-first birthday party had all lined up
behind me, and when I move to the side in my khakis and short-sleeve shirt, they each approach
the bouncer, who is dressed in a too-big suit with uncommonly shiny lapels, and takes a
photograph with him. The birthday girl is the last of her friends up to the door and asks the
bouncer to “carry me like a bride!!!” in her photograph to which the bouncer happily obliges. He
holds her—sliding one arm underneath her knees and one beneath her shoulder blades—King
Kong to her Ann Darrow—and the hem of her dress begins riding up which she excuses by
shouting to all of her friends that she is intoxicated. Soon follow the Aryan Connecticuties,
looking for a break from their Stepford women, certain to be waiting for them, in Nantucket or
Cape Cod or Providence, to do a variety of activities that require turning poor and unassuming
nouns into ghastly verbs: summer, vacation, yacht.
There’s a poker table behind me whose buy in is out of my usually acceptable price
range, not quite high rollers but high rollers for me. At the table are two men and woman. A set
of Asian businessmen are wearing rimless glasses so it looks as though all there is is a metal bar
across the bridges of their noses. At the foot of the stools surrounding the poker table, their
briefcases are wedged between their feet in some sort of airport safety maneuver. They hum to
one another and I’m quite certain that those tonal bastards have an unfair advantage. Beside
them is an older woman dressed in the same outfit as the girls in the birthday party but without

a wig. She’s older than me but her makeup is making her look more attractive, to her credit. She
has thick and uneven inky lines sweeping over her eyelids which extend onto her face and curve
up in a feline fashion and very rosy cheeks which sparkle when the light hits her face. It looks
like she is wearing Jackie’s pageant makeup. Her dress is very lowcut and very tight and it’s
clear that her breasts are not her own because her nipples are pointing up and out towards her
shoulders. I sit down at the stool next to hers.
“Fifteen dollar buy in, sir.”
I shell out a twenty and he gives me a set of multicolored chips, which at this point in
Jackie’s pageant career I know each of the monetary values for, which is why I stop him midsentence when he tries to explain them to me.
“The game is Hold’em, Ladies and Gentlemen. Bet on the flop, on the turn or on the
river.”
When he announces this, the businessmen snap on the sunglass clip-ons to their
spectacles. I pull out the cigar that I bought in the gift shop after Jackie fell asleep. It’s in a pink
cylindrical tin with a picture of the beach and the words Atlantic City written on it in fancy
letters. The waves are bright blue on the tin, with white shiny frosty crests and a bright yellow
sanded beach, which I’d have to say is false advertising because everything outside in Atlantic

City is grey. The water is grey and so is the gravelly sand, which is made up primarily of
stones, glass and cigarette butts, and the boardwalk is also grey. The clouds are grey as though
the beach water evaporated into the clouds in color. The waitress in her velvety crop top with a
roll of fat falling over her high-waisted skirt asks us if we’d like any more drinks. I would and I
tell her so. The drinks are free here if you’re sitting at the tables. They come in tiny plastic
water glasses with only one skinny red straw and not two so that you can’t drink them as fast
unless you gulp them, but they’re strong and, well, they’re free. The two businessmen point to
their empty glasses without looking up and its obvious that they’ve been here for a while or that
their poker strategy is to make me believe that they’ve been here for a while. The lady orders a

whisky sour and I order an old fashioned to show the Asian duo that I’m not intimidated by
their reign over this table.
The cigar is in my mouth and I’m chewing the end of it between my teeth until the fake
breasted woman beside me leans over so that I can see her breasts and just how fake they are
and lights my cigar with a Zippo lighter which is apparently also from Atlantic City.
“Big cigar,” she says to me, her eyes locking with mine.
The businessmen act bothered by the smoke and I’m glad for it. It’s five o’clock in the
morning and the sun should be rising over the grey ocean any minute now but we can’t see it
because there are no windows in the casino, and the windows in the lobby are covered by the
tyrian purple curtains that block out the light entirely because they don’t want you to see the
light and know what time it is so that you keep gambling, which I was going to do anyways.
The businessmen hum to one another again and it’s unbelievably apparent that they’re cheating.
The game’s been going on for some time now, and the pot isn’t very big, but it’s the climax of
the game and time for everyone to make their moves. The businessmen bet, the lady goes all in,
which, considering how small her winnings are, isn’t as daring a move as her tone and face
would suggest. I also go all in, with an okay hand, but I’m a great liar.
“Caw” says one of the businessmen.
“Gentleman calls,” says the dealer.
“Damn,” says the woman.
“Let’s see those cards,” says the dealer.
I don’t move and eventually the dealer looks at me. The businessmen have a flush and a
straight, respectively. The woman has two twos, and I have a jack and a four. I’ve lost again.
“Sir, your cards?”
I lay them face down on the table and he pulls away my cards to reveal a losing hand.
He is short and has slicked back hair and his nametag reads Alan.
“Alan. Alan? Is that your name? I believe its your responsibility to recognize, as a state

officiated dealer, that there two men are cheating.”
“Sir, please lower your voice.”
“They’ve been talking to one another!”
“Sir, I’ll have to ask you again to please lower your voice and to lower your hand.”
“They’re counting cards, Alan! They’re counting cards.”
“Sir, it’s poker.”
“This coming from a state certified dealer who can’t even recognize when people at his
own table are cheating.”
I was beginning to sweat.
“Sir, unless you lower your voice and lower your arm, I’m going to have to ask you to
leave the table.”
“Oh! Fear not, Alan. I’m leaving. Send my drinks to the slots.”
I get up from the table and head towards the slots where overweight people in T-shirts
and white sneakers sit with buckets full of coins. I sit in front of one of the machines that is
Elvis-themed and is playing Viva Las Vegas.
The cigar is still hanging out of my mouth and I need a place to ash it. The seats in
front of the slots are like the fisherman’s chair on a boat, padded, with arm rests. The chair spins
and reclines to accommodate the fight with the fish and to help the angler reel her in. I spin
around in the chair and the ash knub at the end of my cigar is getting heavy and I really need to
find a place to ash it, and when the chair stops spinning and I realize the ash has dropped into
my lap, the woman with fake breasts is standing in front of me. She is very tall because she is
wearing very high-heeled shoes which make her orangey legs look nicer.
“Rough night?”
“Haven’t been winning much.”
“Looking to score big?”
I cross free off of my standards list.

“Guess so.”
“I know a way to make your night better.”
The glowing colors from the slots cast themselves on her peroxide hair and she looks
like a technicolor television character. She inhales demurely from her cigarette and then coughs
very deeply and hacks something up into a hankerchief that she pulls out from between her
breasts.
“How much better and for how much?” I ask her.
We’re in the elevator and its walled in mirrors. Even the portion of the elevator with
the buttons on it has a mirror behind it so that you see yourself reflected with an abdomen full
of buttons. Everything is mirrored but the floor, which would be indecent for ladies in skirts.
And the ceiling is a mirror so that you must see yourself riding up, must see yourself in khakis
and a Hawaiian shirt riding up to the eleventh floor to screw an old asthmatic hooker.
I walk down the hallway to the room and on the way there I tell the woman who’s just
informed me that her name is Crystal Chandelier that I’ve got a thing for bathrooms. I stick the
card into the slot and a small circle on the door flashes red. I try it again and it takes a second
but another small circle flashes green and make a quiet mechanical noise and then the door
opens. I open the bathroom door so that it blocks access to the bedroom where Jackie is asleep
in the King sized bed and where her evening wear, casual wear and swimsuit hang from the
light fixtures in thin dry cleaning plastic.
Crystal unbuckles my belt and slides my khakis down my legs. The bathroom light is
fluorescent and makes my skin look blotchy and red in the mirror and casts dark shadows
beneath my eyes. She takes her dress off and is not wearing a bra. Her panties are black and
have a slit running down the center. Her breasts are huge and look unattractively hard and stick
out very straight, though her right nipple points off a little crookedly and you can see tiny
incision lines where her breasts meet the top of her stomach. I screw her and I hope that her
clear plastic chunky shoes don’t hit the toilet seat and wake Jackie, and when I remember that

Jackie is wearing her lavender-scented headphones that play ambient wave music, I unclench my
ass cheeks which I was clenching to try and hold Crystal a little higher off of the ground.
If Lisa knew I were screwing this woman I doubt she’d be too upset. She’d find a way to
explain myself to her, in the same way Jackie’s shrink explains our daughter to her and in the
same way that she explains things to her patients. She’s got a gift for rationalization. She
attended a lecture last year about male and female energies, and how the union of the two create
some sort of deity, some sort of magic, and it’s a comfort to know that I’m participating in a
religious act. I finish after an acceptable amount of time and Crystal gets off and goes pee. I pull
out my wallet and as she’s wiping herself, still in her slitted panties which she hasn’t taken off,
says that the suggested tip is usually twenty bucks. I giver her eighty and she’s gone.
I take off the Hawaiian shirt and the Khakis and leave on my white undershirt and
boxers. I climb into bed with Jackie and she recognizes me in her sleep and says “Dad” very
softly. The whole bed smells of lavender, and she’s left an extra silk pillow out for me to sleep
on. When she’s asleep, she looks a lot like me because you can’t see her blue eyes which are
strikingly her mother’s.
When the alarm goes off at eight, Jackie is already in the shower. The first round begins
at eleven and by her standards she’s cutting it close. When she’s out of the shower and my Bad
Company T-shirt that she’s had since she was five, and her hair has been towel dried and blow
dried, she comes out of the bathroom for me to apply her creams. She puts hemorrhoid cream
under her eyes and around her eyelids to target the puffiness, and was permitted to do it herself
until last year, when she put too much on her face because she thought it would make her look
thinner and she broke out into a horrible rash.
She puts on her first outfit which is green and has sparkly sequins on the top and itchy
puffy looking fabric on the bottom. The dress is too small for her. The straps are digging into
her shoulders and when she moves around in it, just how small the dress is on her becomes
apparent, but I’m sure her mother has okayed it with her shrink as a way to make her feel

younger. She walks around in it for a while and then shuts herself away in the bathroom to style
and pin her hair and apply her makeup and after an hour she re-emerges and she looks
terrifying. I’ve put my Hawaiian shirt and khakis back on, and after buckling her shoes on, we
walk through the hallway, and into the elevator where I was only a few hours earlier with a
different woman in a similar outfit and a similarly painted visage.
In the convention room, beige plastic chairs have been unfolded into rows for the
audience. I say goodbye to Jackie who wont let me kiss her cheek because of her makeup. I sit
down in the chair among the other parents who are mostly women and mostly overweight with
frizzy hair and unmade faces. Their daughters are announced one by one and strut across the
stage to variously themed music that corresponds to their outfits. The mothers each stand while
their daughters cross the stage, pushing their shoulders back and mouthing the words “posture”
The announcer of the pageant is not southern but calls everyone “y’all.” She announces
Jackie with the biography her mother wrote out.
“Jacqueline Haring is from New York City. Daughter of Lisa Haring, an analyst and
Jack Haring, a high school teacher. Her mother named her Jacqueline after the French
psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan. In her spare time, Jacqueline enjoys reading, playing bridge, and
yoga.”
She walks across the stage in all her sparkly green majesty and looks like the color of
money.
The judges award her straight twos across the board. When I meet her backstage a few
moments later, she is crying. Black watery streaks are running down her face and smudge on
my Hawaiian shirt when she hugs me. She whispers into my ear, but I can hardly hear her over
the disco music that is playing as some girl does the hussle across the stage, so I just hold her
close to me and feel how heavily she is breathing and how her whole body seems to jump when
she hiccups. I release my arms but she hasn’t, she’s holding onto me. I swing one arm beneath
the crease of her knees, and one underneath her back, her small arms are linked tightly around

my neck, and her hiccups start to slow down as another backstage mom shoots me a forced look
of understanding and fashions Jackie’s pageant bag over my wrist, so that I may, with greater
ease, walk out of conference room, past the slots and the poker and the blackjack and the
roulette, through the shiny lobby, and through he front door, where outside it’s grey but it’s
bright, and the crashing of the waves is drowning out the horns of the few cars driving through
Atlantic City.

Hollywood Forever

The “more” in Petunias ‘N’ More meant soil. They sold no other flowers, only petunias.
Olive Lloyd had been working at the shop for six years, and had managed, over the course of
her time there, to resist absorbing any information about flowers. She was old, and on the pudgy
side, but had a stately face. And as a result of her age and her masculine features, customers
rarely asked her questions. She suspected that they bought petunias from her out of guilt, or
pity, or out of fear. Anyhow, it was no matter to her why they bought so many flowers, so long
as they were buying them and she could add to the plot fund.
On the third shelf of her bookshelf, next to an unpacked line of Russian dolls, was a jar
containing the deposit slips of Olive’s plot savings account, which now contained exactly two
thousand, nine hundred and fifty-four dollars in it, about half of what was necessary for the
Hollywood Forever plot she wanted, which rested about forty-five yards from Jane Mansfield
and on the same hill as Cecil B. Demille.
Of all the burial options in Los Angeles, Hollywood Forever was the winner by a long
shot. Besides its famous residents, who were numerous and in and of themselves a strong
enough draw for Olive— to have the worms that crawled around their caskets crawl around
hers—Hollywood Forever had a legion of good qualities. Chief among them was its

architectural excellence: marble statues of cherubs, illegal-Mexican sculpted shrubbery, the
Masonic lodge on site complete with life-size figures of Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, Sophocles,
Sappho, and Cary Grant, the Paramount Pictures water tower which overlooked the central
lawn, and two very well-maintained ponds, one containing ducks, and another, in an area of
more expensive burial property, containing white geese.
Second only to the architecture were the burial properties themselves. Headstones as
tall as refrigerators, some with very convincing looking false-marble columns surrounding the
grave, some with long vertical reflection pools in front of them. It was remarkable how far the
burial arts had come, one could actually make their final resting place underneath the reflection
pool, which is what Olive had set her sights on.
This would cost five thousand, four hundred, and thirty-two dollars exactly, which was
the discounted price, provided Olive would contribute her own flowers. All of this was explained
to her in detail at her Pre-Arrangement meeting. When she had called Hollywood Forever, and
a man named Winston answered the phone, she had cleared her throat and lowered her voice an
octave and arranged an initial meeting with him in a slight British accent.
Olive arrived at the cemetery late and in her Sunday best and sunglasses, all of which to
give the impression that she actually possessed the funds to purchase a Hollywood Forever plot.
She was greeted by Winston , who wasted no time in explaining to Olive the things that would
be offered to her at Hollywood Forever:
“Prearranging your funeral is a natural progression in life. At some point, all of us will
be faced with the loss of a loved one. We want to honor that person in a dignified, caring way.
The prearrangement process gives you the opportunity to make decisions in a businesslike, calm
atmosphere. You have the time to make choices not dictated by emotion or time limits.”
“Yes, well –”

“Prearranging insures you will be remembered as you wish. By completing our Gift of
Love booklet, all the necessary information is available. You may indicate emergency contacts,
the location of important records and detail your biographical information.”
“I –”
“The Gift of Love booklet is also the place to express your final wishes; your choice of
who will conduct your ceremony, music, pallbearers, merchandise and type of burial. Planning
relieves your family members of making very personal decisions at the time of need.”
“Alright, but—”
“Please Miss Lloyd, I have allotted three minutes at the end of our meeting for
questions. Please hold off on all questions until then.”
Olive was quiet, and thoroughly impressed. Winston so well spoken and so polite and so
incredibly thorough!
"Prearranging today protects you and your family from inflation tomorrow. The
inflation factor is built into our policies; your at-need expenses will be covered. Your Hollywood
Forever Funeral Home prearrangement is 100 percent shielded prior to nursing home exposure.
No extensive health questionnaire or physical exam is required. No one will be turned down,
and there is no waiting for return documents.”
There was a long silence between Olive Lloyd and Winston of the Hollywood Forever
Funeral Home.
“You can speak now, Miss Lloyd.”
“Well this all sounds grand indeed.”
“Will you be paying check or credit?”
“Oh, well, Mr. Parsons,”
“Winston, please.”
“Winston. Let’s not be presumptuous now. My family must be consulted, other options
must be considered, surely you understand.”

She had no family, and no other options.
“Yes, of course.”
She left the meeting with the brochures, which included a large map of the Hollywood
Forever grounds, which Olive had unfolded and hung above her bed.
The shop closed at six o’clock and Olive took the forty two-bus home at 6:04. Her
second job began at six-thirty today. Olive lived on a very wide street, packed side-to-side with
short stucco apartment complexes, and wire-fenced homes, which housed people primarily in
her age group, who lived primarily with cats. Olive saw this as a lucrative opportunity. Dogs
were too heavy, and too strong. Cats were just right. She dictated to Felix, the delivery bike boy
at Petunias ‘N’ More, who typed everything that Olive said to him on Marv’s computer in the
back room.
“BREAKING NEWS!” she had yelled to Felix, “New scientific studies prove that cats
live a longer life with exposure to the outdoors and weekly walks.”
Customers peeked around the shop as Olive continued her dictation to Felix in the back
room.
“Dr. Len Winterson, expert of the feline genus at the University of Washington, says
that walking your cat outdoors could significantly extend the life-span of these furry
companions.”
She conjured a two-page report, and had attached copies of it to business cards she had
Felix retrieve from the printer. They read:
OLIVE LLYOD
WILLING AND ABLE
310 210 6745
These packets, she slipped underneath her neighbors’ doors, or in the mailboxes in the
condo lobbies. After three years, she had procured six customers (she had had seven the year
before, but Mrs. Ventura had a coronary and passed in December). On Sundays from six o’clock
to seven-thirty, Olive had her exercise, and made eleven dollars per cat— Banana, Bing Crosby,

Merle, Cat, Monroe, and Bob—which amounted to a grand total of sixty-six dollars per week,
which she deposited directly into the plot account.
Felix delivered the local orders on his bicycle and was underpaid. When he wasn’t
biking and delivering he sat by Olive, who sat by the phone and the cash register and the
petunias. When the phone didn’t ring, and when Olive wasn’t eyeing the customers into buying
flowers, Felix talked about his bicycle, his clairvoyant grandmother in El Salvador whose name
was Chuchi and who he had never met, his father’s truck, his brother’s truck and the truck that
he wanted to buy and why it was the best truck and why all of the things he would then list
made it the best truck, and Olive mainly talked about the plot, until the phone rang and she
answered it and gave Felix the address and the number of petunias that needed to be delivered
to it, which would happen about three times a day, until Felix’s uncle and father would pick him
up in a pick-up truck that sat three in the front seat and Felix’s bicycle on the flatbed on top of
the roofing supplies.
Felix had agreed to help her with menial things for measly pay. Besides taking dictation
from her, he biked her packages and mail to her home from the post office. They lived in a
neighborhood with dirty streets, in the eastern side of town, far away from the Pacific. In fact,
the closest body of water to them was the Los Angeles River, which was more of a gutter than a
river. It ran through most of east Los Angeles, often empty, except in the rain when it filled one
or two inches with murky brown water.
The boxes Felix delivered looked large but were not very heavy because they were
mainly full of tissue paper and bubble wrap which Olive would let Felix take home for his
younger sister to jump on and pop. Packages came for Olive about once a month. She ordered
from catalogues. Most of her spare change went into old copies of Variety Magazine, and framed
pictures of Alfred Hitchcock, who she was absolutely certain had made eyes at her in 1956 when
she worked as a script girl for Columbia Pictures. She had worked there with the intention of
marrying a Hollywood man, but all the script girls were prettier than she was and put out, and

by 1963, Olive worked in the mail room before being asked to leave after it was discovered that
she had been sending love letters to famous actors. The catalogues sold photographs for cheap,
and she saw these purchases as good investments.
On this particular Thursday, Felix delivered a photograph of Hitchcock in profile, with
a long cigar in his mouth and a black mean-looking bird perched on top of the cigar, which
Olive thought must not have been very sanitary. She had unwrapped it and put the bubble wrap
in a bag for Felix and sent him home with five dollars.
On Friday, Olive received a phone call for flowers from Hollywood Forever, and sent
Felix with the van to the cemetery.
“Now do you understand?” she had asked him when he had returned after an hour of
sitting in traffic on the way back from the cemetery, tipless.
“Not really.”
“Did you see the statues?”
“Yup.”
“The fountain?”
“Yup.”
“The lodge?”
“Doesn’t seem worth over 5K.”
“Well, it is.”
The phone rang. Olive answered.
“Hello? No. Only Petunias. Soil. It’s not misleading. No. Only Petunias.”
She hung up.
“It’s worth it.”
“OK, Miss Olive.”
She had visited a religious cemetery on the other side of town. Not as abounding with
famous people but for two local politicians, the more famous of whom had hung himself off of a

ceiling fan after his involvement in high end Malibu prostitution rink had been exposed. These
details had been explained to her as selling points by a bald man named Shmul who covered his
friar’s ring in a wide yamecha. The plot on the same hill as this rather notorious politician had
become available after his two children had opted not to be buried near to him.
“This is prime real estate, Miss Lloyd,” Shmul said quietly to her, as though he were
letting her in on a secret, “I think you’ll be very happy here.”
She disagreed.
Olive had one meeting left, three bus rides away, at the top of a valley in the Malibucanyon side. It wasn’t a cemetery. It was listed in the phone book and on the computer where
Felix looked it up, as a spreading ground. A tall steel gate stood with an enamel rainbow on the
top of the left side and a copper colored pot of gold on the other side. When the gate was closed,
the rainbow linked to the gold pot. At the top of the gate hung a large bell with a chain
dropping down from within it. It made a sound like a tipping cow when Olive yanked it around,
and though he took some time to answer her call, a man arrived to open the gate. He was very
tall and very tanned, wearing denim from head to toe, a light denim shirt, with white pearly
snaps over the breast pockets and down the center, and dark denim jeans that were torn around
his knees and flared around his ankles. His hair was long and white and was arranged messily
into two long braided pigtails.
He allowed her through the gates and she greeted him excitedly. The grounds were
vast, and from this peak, Olive could see the lush valley below and the Pacific Ocean in the
distance.
“Please keep your voice down, sister.”
“Pardon me?”
“The dead are napping.”

The man had introduced himself as Dale and led Olive from the gate to a short log cabin
across a foul smelling field. She was offered a stool to sit on, Dale sat cross-legged on a Navaho
blanket on the ground.
“Three of the Laurel Canyon greats have been spread on our grounds, and continue to
find musical communion with one another on the other side through their ashes intermingling
here.”
When he spoke, he pressed his hands together, as though he were praying, and rocked
them back and forth, closing his eyes for long periods of time as he invited Olive to breathe with
him.
“When the flowers grow, it’s as though their spirits are reborn into the earth.”
Olive knew full well that no flowers could grow on a field covered in ashes, and left
thinking the spreading ground was better suited for those of a younger generation. It was at
that precise moment that Olive decided that she would settle for nothing but Hollywood
Forever, what with her illustrious neighbors and the summer film festival that happened on the
cemetery grounds which only required minimal cleanup of soda cans and cigarette butts.
Petunias N’ More stayed opened on weekends, which meant more time for Olive to
work. Then, the shop opened two hours later than its weekly opening of eight o’clock. Olive had
started to wake at dawn on the weekends and took the bus to ritzier neighborhoods, west, to
spread around her business cards. On Saturdays Felix still made bike deliveries for the shop, but
on Sundays, he went to Church with his family, who forbade him to work on the Sabbath, or
what Felix called el Dia del Señor.
Sundays were quieter without Felix around. He wasn’t coming in and out of the shop,
retelling abuela Chuchi’s visions, bug-eyed about the air he’d just achieved on his bike (he was
an excellent cyclist), or asking Olive about the plot, and about how much money she had made,
and how much she was making from cat walking, and why she spent her “alive life preparing for
her dead life.” Without Felix she spent Sundays alone, with the petunias and with the phone,

and sometime, when he wasn’t sleeping, with Marv, the owner of the shop, a short man with a
shiny head, a wrinkled face, thin legs and a fat belly, who winked at Olive a lot, and called Felix
“Bean Dip,” and who sat in the back room and drove the van if needed, though he was much
older than Olive and could hardly see.
When Olive arrived at the shop at eight o’clock on Monday morning, Marv was asleep
in the back room where she had left him the night before with an open bottle of Jamaican rum.
In her purse, she had thirty-three dollars that she had collected from cat-walking early that
morning, and the change of a broken twenty from that morning’s bus fare, which totaled to
fifty-one dollars and forty-four cents. The radio said it was going to be “a scorcher,” and this
seemed accurate to Olive, because by eight-forty, when Felix was dropped off by the pickup
truck that this morning sat four in the front of which he was one, it was already eighty-three
degrees and Olive was perspiring an unladylike amount and was beginning to feel faint near the
wilting petunias. Felix walked past Olive at the register where she was fanning herself:
“Miss Olive.”
“Good morning, Felix.”
He looked upset.
“Mr. Marv!” he raised his voice, while knocking on the back room door.
“He’s asleep,” whispered Olive to Felix.
“I gotta get paid, Miss Olive.”
“Don’t I know it.”
“Mr. Marv?” he said quietly as he opened the door to the backroom where Marv was
sleeping on his side with his hand trapped in between his legs.
“God dammit, Bean Dip. It’s early.”
“It’s almost nine, Mr. Marv.”
“Precisely.”
“But the shop opens at eight”

“Quieter, Beanie.”
“Sorry to bother you, Mr. Marv, but you have not paid me in five weeks, Mr. Marv, and
I don’t like to have to ask you, but I need my money Mr. Marv, for school in the fall, Mr. Marv.”
“You remember what we talked about, Bean Dip?”
“Yes. But this was some time ago.”
It was very hot in Marv’s back room.
“The shop’s lagging, and we’ve all gotta be patient.”
“You’ve been paying Miss Olive.”
“That’s because she sells flowers, and she’s got her big plan for Hollywood Forever, and
she’s an old lady.”
“You owe me nine-hundred and twenty dollars for the last two four weeks.”
“It can’t be that much, I pay you five an hour.”
“I can show you my calculations.”
“That’s alright, Bean, I’ll try and believe you.”
“By California Law, employees cannot go more than two weeks without being paid.”
“Unfortunately for you, Bean Dip, being an illegal bean, you don’t enjoy California
Law.”
Olive was by the register, looking for a fan.
“But I’m going to try and be big about this and pay you for today’s work.”
“Mr. Marv—”
“You’re welcome.”
“I need my paycheck for—”
“Don’t you have something to deliver?”
“Yes, sir.”
Felix turned towards the door.

“They say it’s going to be a scorcher, make sure to stay hydrated,” Marv laughed to
Felix, holding out the nearly-empty bottle of rum.
When Felix came out to the front, Olive was sitting on her stool behind the register,
her forehead dotted in sweat, fanning herself with a petunia. The phone was ringing.
“Miss Olive, you gonna get that?
“What did you say?”
“You gonna get that?”
“Get what?”
“The phone, Miss Olive.”
“What about it, Felix?”
“It’s ringing, Miss Olive.”
She looked at the phone. It was indeed ringing.
“Hello? Yes, it is. Only Petunias, sir. Yes. Yes, I am aware. Hello?”
“Any deliveries?
“No. What happened in there?”
“Just need my school money. Shouldn’t you fan yourself with something else, Miss
Olive?”
“Couldn’t find anything else. This thing will be dead soon anyhow. Did he pay you?”
“No.”
“It’s an oven in here.”
Felix was quiet.
“It was even hot this morning when I walked Pussy and Cat in the flats.”
“Those are their names?”
“According to Mrs. Rosenberg’s maid, they’re mates.”
“I can’t believe that worked.”
“Some people like to spend money.”

“Everyone likes to spend money, Miss Olive. Only some people have some.”
Marv was snoring so loudly from the back room that Olive and Felix could hear him by
the register. A smooth-skinned young lady walked into the shop and Felix sat up straighter on
the stool next to Olive’s. She was pretty and pulled her hair back as she walked around.
“Miss Olive.”
Felix nugged her.
“Don’t you want to ask her if she needs some help?”
“Do I ever ask customers if they need help, Felix?”
“Let us know if you need anything!” he shouted to the young lady.
She didn’t look up.
“It’s real hot today, huh?” he said to her.
“Hot as hell. I didn’t need no flowers I was jus’ comin’ in here to see if ya’ll guys got air
conditionin’, but I can see that ya’ll are as hot in here as I was outside.”
She walked back out, and Felix followed her and offered to buy her a soda. The phone
rang and Olive answered it, and took the delivery order, which the woman on the other end of
the phone said was UR! GENT!
“Felix!”
He glared at Olive through the unclean shop windows that separated the sidewalk
where he knew he was making progress with the young lady, and the shop.
“Delivery, Felix!”
“One minute, Miss Olive!”
He walked back inside.
“No disrespect, Miss Olive, but that’s my game you’re threatening outside.”
“Delivery.”
“The way you think about your plot, that’s the way I think about girls like that. I help
you with the plot.”

“You do.”
“You gotta help me out with this stuff.”
Olive just nodded.
“Two medium bouquets, to 478 Vernon St. Sorry about your games. Oh, and they say
it’s UR! GENT! so take the van.”
When Felix returned, Olive was asleep behind the counter, and covered in sweat, with
the now very wilted flower hanging limply her loosely clenched hand. There was a note on the
counter beneath a ten-dollar bill that read:
Lady was asleep. Took the flowers. Left the cash.
Felix took the money and brought it to Marv’s office in the back.
“Mr. Marv?”
He was awake now, and laying out a few dirty green bills on the table in front of him.
“Always got something to say, Bean Dip.”
“ I wanted to give you this money. Someone left it on the counter with a note in front
because Miss Olive fell asleep.”
“She still sleeping, huh?”
“Looks like it.”
“Close the door, kid, it’s your payday.”
Felix closed the door loudly, which woke Olive up. On the counter in front of her was a
note. She looked around for the cash, but saw no bills. It was ten ‘til four and she didn’t know
how long she had been asleep. Her right hand smelled like that stuff that Marv sprayed on the
petunias to make their petals look shinier. Olive hated to be this hot, but preferred being hot
over being cold—if she had to chose weather to burn or freeze to death she always picked burn,
and she tried to remember that on hot days like these. There were no customers around, and she
didn’t anticipate hot days made anyone want to buy petunias, so Olive left her post at the
register, and walked around the back of the shop where the hose that Marv filed the flower

buckets with was linked to a faucet. She poured from the hose right into her mouth, which she
probably wouldn’t have done on a cooler day.
Felix was back by the time she had returned to her desk.
“You just get in?”
“Got back a while ago. You were sleeping.”
Olive was curious.
“Is that so?”
“Yeah I threw out that petunia in your hand.”
He had been at the counter. It was starting to become clear to Olive what had happened.
“Is that so?”
He had seen the money and, angry about this morning’s fit with Marv, taken the money
for himself. How could she be certain, though? She would test him.
“You forgot the note, Felix.”
“What?”
“When you took the money you forgot the note.”
“I don’t think Mr. Marv needs that.”
“Is that so?” she said very slowly.
He didn’t inquire at all as to what note she was referring to. He had seen the note and
he had seen the money and he had taken it.
On the bus ride home, Olive went over the day in her head. It all added up. Felix needed
the money, Marv didn’t give him the money, he saw it on the counter and he took it for himself.
Marv hadn’t been very nice to him, paying him less because he could, because he was paying
him under the table, and calling him that terrible name. But it didn’t justify stealing. Besides,
that money would have gone in the cash register, which meant that Olive would have made
commission off of it, and stealing from Marv was wrong but stealing from Olive was
unacceptable.

It was cooler inside Olive’s small house. She had drawn the blinds in the morning
before she left, at the suggestion of the weather man on the radio who had talked about the heat
so emphatically that he sounded like Sylvester the Cat sweating and spitting all over his
microphone as the weather report came through the airwaves into a small brown box by her
bedside. Her bedroom was zebra printed now, striped—with lines of light and lines of shade.
There was more light than shade, but in Olive’s bedroom, the heat had all but seeped away. Five
shelves sandwiched one on top of the next and a poorly-enforced door stood as the first and
second barrier between her bedroom and the steaming pavement outside. The shelves housed
items of descending importance, her plot jar on the top, the Varietys on the shelf below it,
underneath the binder of newspaper clippings and playbills, a miniature Walk of Fame star that
was bent at its edges and read OLIV LOYD, followed below by the shelf seating a small vase of
petunias which Marv sent her home with every three days, and finally a shelf with one red high
heel on it which she had taken as a memento from the costume department at Columbia.
She sat on the corner of her bed, beside her purse, and removed her shoes, which
smelled terrible and stuck a little bit to her moist stockings. Next she unpacked her purse—the
hairbrush went to her nightstand, the small bottle of lotion there too, the money in her wallet to
the envelopes in her desk drawer. There were five singles inside the wallet. She dug around the
purse, frantic, her state of mind like the day’s weather, but the money was gone. He had taken it
all. He had taken the money from the counter and the money from her bag, forty seven dollars
from her bag, Felix, she couldn’t believe it, but he had done it, this unthinkable malfeasance, he
had needed to get paid and Marv wouldn’t give it to him and he had taken it from her. The
room felt hot again, and she poured herself a tall glass of water and drank it and refilled the
glass and fell asleep before finishing the second helping.
In the morning, she spoke to Marv.
“I think you are correct in your accusation, Lloyd. I bet it was the Bean Dip.”
“His name is Felix.”

“He’s a beanie little thief is what he is,” Marv had said to her the next morning.
They watched together from the register as Felix dismounted the front seat of the pickup truck, which stood very high off the ground. He wheeled his bike off the flatbed and onto the
cement and then into the slots of a bike rack outside of the shop to which he locked it with very
thick fetters.
“Sit down, frijole.”
“Mr. Marv?”
“On the stool.”
He sat down.
“Stealing is wrong, wouldn’t you say, Bean-Bandit?”
“Yes.”
Marv had the hiccups.
“You ac hup knowledge that hup stealing is hup wrong?”
Olive stood with her hands on her thighs behind Marv.
“Yes.”
“Olive here knows that you took money from her wallet yesterday.”
“Miss Olive?”
“I need that money, Felix.”
“I know that, Miss Olive.”
“That’s for my plot.”
“I know, Miss Olive, but I didn’t take nothing from you.”
“Open your wallet.”
Inside of Felix’s wallet was a wrinkled white envelope with forty- seven dollars inside of
it.
“Voilá!”
“Miss Olive, Mr. Marv gave me that yesterday.”

“Hey now, Bean Dip, Ca ya tey, as they say in Mexican.”
“Marv?”
“You think I took it, Olive? Do I look hup like I’d need to steal from an old lady? I am
the owner of a lucrative business. Let’s be realistic now.”
“You told me business was lagging.”
“Easy, Bean. You can try and wriggle your way out of this all you like, you know you’re
out of here.”
“Miss Olive.”
“Don’t look at her. Out. Hola.”
Felix looked at Olive for what seemed to her like a very long time, as though he were
walking in reverse, a rosy cheeked specter exiting the flower shop.
By Friday, Marv had hired someone new. He was younger than Felix, not quite fifteen,
and not as elegant of a cyclist, which, besides his one eyebrow, was the first thing that Olive had
noticed about Artur. Olive had tried to talk to him, about the plot at Hollywood Forever and
just what it would mean to be buried in the same hill as Cecil B. Demille. Artur didn’t know who
that was, and called Olive things under his breath in Spanish that she couldn’t understand.
The heat wave that had hit the city those weeks ago had only just started to recede.
Olive walked the cats again, having abandoned them for those hot weeks. Marv put away the
fist-sized fan that he had placed at the register at Olive’s insistence. Marv was getting along
with the new kid—he paid the boy in bottles of liquor that Artur’s childish features made it
impossible to for him to buy, and Artur didn’t speak much. Marv called him Hombre.
Only fifteen hundred dollars stood between Olive and her plot. Felix’s absence was
unmissable to her now. She was good at alone, she had to be, but in her loneliness, all she
thought about was whether he would attend her funeral, and if, while there, he would ever
concede the esteem of Hollywood Forever, and if he would know that she was being buried that
day at all. These were the things running through her mind when she dismounted the forty

two-bus at eight o’clock. Her bus stop and Petunias N’ More were separated by a very busy
intersection, on which cars drove fast, stop lights were only a suggestion and a Mosaical staff
was a necessary tool for illegal crossing. At the other end of the crosswalk, a box flashed an
orange neon hand and a timer that, at the moment she reached the white lines that ran across
the wide street, showed ten seconds on the clock. Ten seconds was enough time for an ablebodied body to cross this street, and though Olive hadn’t met that description for some time,
since her return to cat walking and the end of the miserable heat wave, her joints had been
feeling particularly well-oiled and this morning Olive was emboldened.
Alarmed by a loudening buzzing, a few steps into the crosswalk, Olive halted. She
turned, and put one hand on her hip, taking slow steps forward, looking toward the snow
capped San Gabriels and the Chino Hills to the east. The cars behind the red lights gave off an
eagerness like horses at a start line or hot bulls, spurred and mounted and trapped behind the
gate. Olive was wearing red and was in the middle of a good laugh to herself, thinking of what
Marv’s face would look like when she gave him a piece of her mind in a few minutes, when she
put a face to that awful buzzing.
Artur was on that tiny bike of his, the one he had rudely explained to Olive was meant
for tricks. He was biking towards the intersection at an incredible speed, standing up on the
pedals, his tongue hanging out of his open mouth. Olive had made it to the farther side of the
crosswalk, across the double yellow lines that split the intersection in half, where no cars had
arrived at the light.
“Out of the way, Olive. Move!” Artur yelled at her.
She jumped to the side, as the cars sped towards the green light, and felt a big-boned,
air-knocking shove on her side, the hot metal of the car warming her love handle and the
pavement heating her back, as her neck was moistened by a thick liquid. Things were loud and
then quiet, the former multiplying into the latter, the horns of the cars together in unison, so

sonorous that their frequencies seemed to match one another and overwhelm Olive’s red ear
before loudening so that the frequencies canceled each other and there was nothing but silence.

