Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2015

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2015

Defining (Wo)Manhood: Exploring Gender Roles
in James Joyce's Ulysses
Victoria Leigh Prince
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Prince, Victoria Leigh, "Defining (Wo)Manhood: Exploring Gender Roles in James Joyce's Ulysses" (2015). Senior Projects Spring
2015. Paper 319.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2015/319

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2015 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

	  

	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Defining	  (Wo)Manhood:	  
	  
Exploring	  Gender	  Roles	  in	  James	  Joyce’s	  Ulysses	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Senior	  Project	  submitted	  to	  
	  
The	  Division	  of	  Languages	  and	  Literature	  
	  
Of	  Bard	  College	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
By	  
	  
Victoria	  Prince	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Annandale	  on	  Hudson,	  New	  York	  
	  
May	  2015	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
Acknowledgements	  	  
	  
	  
First	  and	  foremost	  I	  have	  to	  thank	  my	  advisor	  Stephen	  Graham,	  without	  whom,	  I	  
honestly	  don’t	  know	  where	  this	  project	  would	  have	  ended	  up.	  He	  was	  an	  invaluable	  
resource	  during	  the	  writing	  process	  and	  his	  attention	  and	  support	  are	  something	  I	  am	  
eternally	  grateful	  for.	  	  
	  
I	  would	  also	  like	  to	  thank	  my	  wonderful	  mother,	  who	  has	  supported	  me	  and	  pushed	  me	  
to	  be	  the	  best	  woman	  I	  can	  be.	  And	  of	  course	  I	  have	  to	  thank	  my	  brilliant	  stepdad,	  Ross,	  
who	  has	  dedicated	  hours	  of	  his	  time	  to	  editing	  and	  revising	  my	  work	  since	  I	  was	  a	  
freshman	  here	  at	  Bard.	  	  
	  
Lastly,	  I	  would	  like	  to	  thank	  my	  closest	  friends,	  Sarah,	  Serena	  and	  Shelby	  for	  being	  the	  
most	  compassionate	  and	  understanding	  people	  I	  have	  ever	  had	  the	  pleasure	  of	  
knowing.	  When	  things	  got	  crazy	  I	  always	  knew	  I	  had	  you	  guys	  there	  to	  keep	  me	  
grounded.	  I	  love	  you	  all!	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
Table	  of	  Contents	  	  
	  
	  
Introduction	  	  

1	  

	  
“Beasts	  and	  Fowls”:	  Struggling	  to	  Define	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  Masculine/Feminine	  
Appetites	  	  
10	  
	  
“Womb	  of	  Sin”:	  How	  the	  Male	  Gaze	  Attempts	  to	  Marginalize	  Molly	  Bloom	  
	  
“The	  Missus	  is	  Master”:	  How	  Molly	  Bloom	  Redefines	  her	  Sex	  and	  Gender	  

32	  
51	  

Bibliography	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

72	  

	  

	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

1	  

	  
Introduction	  
	  	  
	  

	  

The	  question	  of	  identity	  plays	  a	  large	  part	  within	  James	  Joyce’s	  Ulysses.	  It	  was	  

published	  in	  1922,	  right	  as	  the	  countries	  decades-­‐long	  civil	  war	  was	  beginning.	  This	  
civil	  war	  was	  largely	  a	  conflict	  based	  around	  contested	  Irish	  identities.	  It	  was	  the	  
fight	  between	  those	  who	  remained	  faithful	  to	  the	  Anglo-­‐Irish	  Treaty,	  signed	  in	  1921,	  
and	  the	  Irish	  Republican	  Army,	  which	  demanded	  total	  independence	  from	  England.	  
What	  it	  meant	  to	  be	  “Irish”	  wasn’t	  an	  easy	  answer;	  it	  was	  one	  fraught	  with	  confusion	  
and	  layers	  of	  nationalized	  hatred.	  England’s	  long-­‐standing	  presence	  in	  Ireland	  had	  
only	  complicated	  these	  questions	  of	  nationality	  and	  1922	  marked	  the	  year	  that	  civil	  
war	  would	  begin	  in	  earnest.	  This	  is	  the	  world	  that	  Joyce	  was	  observing;	  however,	  
Ulysses	  is	  set	  back	  in	  time,	  in	  Dublin	  1904.	  Regardless	  of	  the	  years	  that	  separate	  
these	  two	  dates,	  though,	  Irish	  identity	  was	  still	  a	  large	  problem	  at	  the	  onset	  of	  the	  
20th	  century.	  Ireland’s	  status	  as	  an	  English	  colony	  was	  a	  major	  point	  of	  contention.	  
This	  struggle	  over	  national	  identity	  parallels	  Joyce’s	  choice	  to	  deal	  with	  gender	  
identity	  within	  Ulysses.	  With	  respect	  to	  both	  gender	  and	  nationalism	  we	  are	  forced	  
to	  ask	  the	  questions,	  where	  do	  these	  ideas	  of	  the	  self	  originate?	  Who	  dictates	  what	  it	  
means	  to	  be	  Irish,	  or	  masculine	  or	  feminine?	  In	  his	  essay,	  “Origins	  and	  Legacies	  of	  
Irish	  Prudery:	  Sexuality	  and	  Social	  Control	  in	  Modern	  Ireland,”	  Tom	  Inglis	  claims	  
that,	  	  
One	  of	  the	  primary	  mechanisms	  of	  everyday	  policing	  was	  
the	  control	  of	  desire	  and	  pleasure,	  especially	  sexual	  
desire	  and	  pleasure.	  Social	  order	  was	  maintained	  as	  long	  
as	  individuals	  did	  not	  seek	  to	  satisfy	  their	  pleasures	  and	  
desires…(11)	  
	  

	  
	  

2	  

	  
This	  idea	  becomes	  central	  to	  Inglis’	  argument,	  which	  revolves	  around	  the	  problems	  
that	  arise	  when	  a	  primarily	  Catholic	  country	  such	  as	  Ireland	  experiences	  a	  sexual	  
awakening.	  He	  focuses	  on	  these	  same	  themes	  of	  identity,	  and	  the	  contentious	  issue	  
of	  defining	  ones	  sexuality	  when	  society	  has	  told	  you	  to	  deny	  that	  part	  of	  yourself.	  
Each	  of	  Joyce’s	  characters	  is	  confronted	  with	  this	  type	  of	  self-­‐denial	  as	  it	  relates	  to	  
their	  sexual	  expression	  and	  gender	  performance.	  	  
	  

Ulysses	  focuses	  mainly	  on	  the	  narratives	  of	  two	  male	  characters,	  Leopold	  

Bloom	  and	  Stephen	  Dedalus,	  but	  as	  a	  first	  time	  reader	  I	  found	  myself	  increasingly	  
drawn	  to	  the	  less	  tangible	  female	  presences	  within	  the	  novel.	  Barmaids,	  prostitutes,	  
mothers,	  and	  most	  importantly	  Molly	  Bloom,	  are	  all	  characters	  that,	  while	  not	  at	  the	  
forefront	  of	  the	  plot,	  seem	  to	  dictate	  the	  movements	  of	  their	  male	  counterparts.	  This	  
relationship,	  between	  the	  female	  and	  male	  characters,	  was	  what	  first	  led	  me	  to	  look	  
more	  closely	  at	  Molly	  and	  Leopold	  Bloom.	  I	  found	  the	  “Penelope”	  episode	  intriguing,	  
Molly’s	  strong-­‐willed	  temperament	  contrasted	  nicely	  with	  the	  meekness	  I	  saw	  in	  
Leopold.	  I	  wanted	  to	  look	  more	  closely	  at	  how	  Molly	  influenced	  Leopold	  throughout	  
the	  novel,	  creating	  an	  argument	  focused	  solely	  on	  her	  enduring	  presence	  
throughout	  the	  first	  seventeen	  episodes.	  However,	  as	  I	  began	  my	  attempt	  to	  argue	  
that	  Molly,	  as	  a	  feminine	  presence,	  was	  the	  elusive	  force	  pushing	  Leopold	  
throughout	  his	  day,	  I	  began	  to	  notice	  something	  else:	  Leopold	  complicated	  the	  entire	  
concept	  of	  a	  “feminine”	  presence.	  I	  noticed	  that	  perhaps	  it	  wasn’t	  Molly’s	  femininity	  
that	  was	  behind	  Leopold’s	  actions	  and	  thoughts,	  but	  his	  own.	  As	  this	  concept	  of	  the	  
“feminine”	  continued	  to	  obscure	  my	  initial	  readings,	  I	  began	  to	  think	  about	  Leopold	  
as	  a	  “masculine”	  presence	  as	  well.	  These	  gender	  identifiers—“feminine”	  and	  
	  

	  
	  

3	  

“masculine”—inhered	  in	  my	  previous	  idea,	  except	  that	  I	  realized	  it	  wasn’t	  Molly	  as	  a	  
female	  who	  was	  pushing	  Leopold,	  but	  rather	  his	  own	  “femininity”.	  
	  

Once	  I	  began	  to	  question	  the	  concept	  of	  gender	  and	  how	  it	  functions	  within	  

Ulysses,	  my	  argument	  changed	  its	  focus.	  If	  I	  chose	  to	  look	  at	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  
constructed	  gender,	  I	  had	  to	  give	  the	  same	  attention	  to	  Leopold.	  They	  each	  subsist	  
within	  these	  social	  constructs,	  oscillating	  between	  what	  is	  comfortably	  “male”	  or	  
“female.”	  Observing	  how	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom	  put	  into	  question	  these	  
stereotypical	  concepts	  of	  gender,	  and	  how	  they	  function	  within	  the	  novel,	  put	  the	  
Blooms’	  relationship	  into	  perspective.	  As	  two	  people	  who	  neither	  accepted	  their	  
place	  as	  “manly	  man”	  or	  “womanly	  woman,”	  it	  was	  clear	  that	  gender	  was	  playing	  a	  
different	  role	  than	  I	  previously	  anticipated.	  I	  took	  Suzette	  Henke’s	  concept	  of	  the	  
“womanly	  man,”	  (106)	  which	  she	  attributes	  to	  Leopold	  Bloom,	  and	  applied	  it	  to	  his	  
wife,	  Molly.	  In	  the	  end,	  I	  realized	  that	  by	  creating	  a	  space	  where	  one	  could	  be	  both	  
“masculine”	  and	  “feminine,”	  Joyce,	  whether	  inadvertently	  or	  by	  design,	  had	  
subverted	  the	  gender	  norms	  of	  his	  day.	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom	  successfully	  call	  
into	  question	  what	  it	  meant	  to	  be	  a	  “man”	  or	  a	  “woman”	  in	  twentieth	  century	  Dublin.	  	  
	  

Joyce’s	  challenge	  to	  the	  social	  assumptions	  that	  go	  along	  with	  gender	  

performance	  are	  only	  highlighted	  through	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  he	  exemplifies	  what	  it	  
does	  mean	  to	  be	  stereotypically	  “masculine”	  or	  “feminine.”	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  
character	  is	  seen	  in	  direct	  contrast	  to	  the	  male	  presences	  in	  Dublin	  that	  surrounds	  
him.	  Men	  such	  as	  Simon	  Dedalus,	  Martin	  Cunningham,	  Lenehan,	  and	  the	  citizen	  are	  
all	  examples	  of	  what	  Joyce	  saw	  as	  the	  “manly	  men”	  of	  Dublin	  city.	  In	  his	  biography	  of	  
Joyce,	  Richard	  Ellmann	  writes,	  “He	  [Leopold]	  achieves	  this	  distinction	  in	  part	  by	  not	  

	  

	  
	  

4	  

belonging	  in	  a	  narrow	  sense,	  by	  ignoring	  the	  limits	  of	  national	  life;	  he	  is	  not	  so	  much	  
and	  Irishman	  as	  a	  man”	  (372).	  Ellmann	  emphasizes	  Bloom’s	  separation	  from	  these	  
other	  Irishmen,	  concluding	  that	  even	  though	  their	  gender	  connects	  them,	  Leopold	  
Bloom	  remains	  distinct	  in	  his	  defiance	  of	  what	  it	  means	  to	  be	  the	  formulaic	  “Irish	  
man.”	  By	  separating	  himself	  from	  these	  men,	  Leopold	  to	  some	  extent	  puts	  himself	  
into	  the	  realm	  of	  “other.”	  Even	  though	  he	  identifies	  as	  Irish,	  he	  does	  not	  exemplify	  
the	  same	  “masculine”	  characteristics	  that	  his	  acquaintances	  do.	  The	  distinction	  
between	  “Irishman”	  and	  “man”	  is	  interesting	  because	  it	  assumes	  that	  Bloom’s	  
Irishness,	  or	  lack	  thereof,	  is	  indicative	  of	  his	  place	  outside	  the	  realm	  of	  
stereotypically	  masculine	  Dublin.	  His	  otherness,	  as	  exemplified	  in	  his	  place	  between	  
the	  “male”	  and	  the	  “female,”	  is	  only	  intensified	  by	  the	  hyper-­‐masculine	  presence	  of	  
these	  “Irishmen.”	  While	  these	  men	  spend	  most	  of	  the	  novel	  in	  pubs,	  drinking	  or	  
gossiping	  about	  Leopold	  and	  Molly,	  he	  spends	  his	  day	  wandering	  the	  streets,	  
contemplating	  his	  place	  amongst	  them.	  Leopold’s	  role	  as	  the	  womanly	  man	  allows	  
him	  to	  exist	  in	  a	  space	  where	  he’s	  safe	  from	  the	  types	  of	  societal	  constraints	  (being	  
limited	  geographically	  to	  the	  pub,	  or	  a	  workplace)	  put	  upon	  the	  manly	  men	  of	  
Dublin.	  	  
	  

If	  Leopold	  finds	  his	  freedom	  in	  the	  ability	  to	  wander	  around	  Dublin	  as	  the	  

womanly	  man,	  how	  are	  we	  supposed	  to	  observe	  Molly’s	  role	  as	  the	  manly	  woman	  
when	  she’s	  remained	  in	  the	  house	  throughout	  the	  entire	  novel?	  Their	  gender	  
experiences	  are	  very	  different.	  Molly	  challenges	  both	  her	  “masculine”	  and	  
“feminine”	  desires	  in	  her	  monologue	  (“Penelope”)	  by	  criticizing	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  
she’s	  expected	  to	  uphold	  or	  deny	  these	  gender	  expectations.	  However,	  as	  a	  woman	  

	  

	  
	  

5	  

she’s	  not	  given	  the	  same	  access	  to	  freedom	  as	  Leopold	  is	  as	  a	  man.	  Joyce	  never	  
depicts	  Molly	  outside	  of	  her	  home,	  emphasizing	  the	  societal	  constraints	  put	  on	  
women	  in	  the	  twentieth	  century.	  A	  woman	  had	  three	  important	  roles	  in	  Ireland—
wife,	  mother,	  and	  homemaker—all	  of	  which	  Molly	  challenges	  in	  the	  course	  of	  her	  
episode.	  Moreover,	  unlike	  most	  of	  her	  female	  contemporaries	  she	  has	  a	  profession:	  
she’s	  a	  singer.	  This	  is	  a	  detail	  that	  comes	  up	  in	  relation	  to	  her	  affair	  with	  manager,	  
Hugh	  “Blazes”	  Boylan.	  Even	  though	  she’s	  often	  criticized	  for	  this	  affair,	  it’s	  provided	  
her	  with	  her	  only	  means	  of	  escape.	  By	  embracing	  her	  “feminine”	  and	  “masculine”	  
traits,	  she	  successfully	  liberates	  herself	  from	  the	  societal	  confines	  of	  being	  labeled	  a	  
“womanly”	  woman.	  What	  does	  it	  mean	  to	  be	  this	  “womanly	  woman”	  in	  Dublin	  1904?	  	  
	  

The	  only	  other	  prominent	  female	  in	  the	  novel	  aside	  from	  Molly	  is	  Gerty	  

MacDowell,	  whose	  brief	  interaction	  with	  Leopold	  is	  the	  focus	  of	  the	  “Nausicaa”	  
episode.	  Gerty	  exemplifies	  a	  certain	  ideal	  of	  Irish	  femininity;	  her	  youth	  and	  beauty	  
are	  what	  attract	  the	  rapacious	  Leopold.	  When	  Joyce	  glimpses	  into	  the	  mind	  of	  Gerty	  
we	  see	  her	  caught	  up	  in	  her	  own	  desires	  for	  romance	  and	  love,	  desires	  she	  projects	  
onto	  the	  mysterious	  stranger	  watching	  her	  (Leopold).	  Gerty	  is	  characterized	  by	  
these	  romantic	  idealizations,	  thoughts	  that	  could	  be	  attributed	  to	  her	  age	  or	  the	  fact	  
that	  as	  a	  woman	  she’s	  expected	  to	  be	  after	  one	  thing,	  not	  sex,	  but	  a	  consuming	  
romance.	  Her	  musings	  directly	  contrast	  those	  of	  Molly,	  who	  not	  only	  craves	  
romance,	  but	  sex,	  companionship,	  and	  freedom.	  Her	  desires	  are	  much	  more	  
complicated	  than	  the	  young	  Gerty’s,	  just	  as	  Leopold’s	  desires	  are	  more	  complicated	  
than	  those	  of	  the	  other	  men	  he	  encounters.	  Tom	  Inglis	  addresses	  this	  topic	  in	  his	  
essay.	  He	  writes,	  “Sexual	  transgression	  may	  be	  closely	  linked	  to	  the	  realization	  of	  

	  

	  
	  

6	  

self,	  but	  it	  can	  also	  constitute	  a	  fundamental	  challenge	  to	  civilization	  and	  the	  existing	  
social	  order”	  (12).	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  exist	  as	  two	  people	  who	  have	  used	  “sexual	  
transgression”	  in	  an	  attempt	  to	  more	  clearly	  define	  themselves.	  Inglis’	  point	  also	  
gives	  clarify	  to	  the	  question,	  why	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  were	  so	  ostracized	  by	  their	  
society?	  Aside	  from	  their	  racial	  differences,	  their	  inability	  to	  accept	  society’s	  rigid	  
gender	  expectations	  highlights	  them	  as	  threats	  to	  the	  foundation	  of	  Irish	  society.	  
Their	  choice	  not	  to	  comply	  with	  this	  “existing	  social	  order”	  is	  one	  way	  in	  which	  
Joyce	  successfully	  separates	  them	  from	  those	  who	  have	  accepted	  this	  order.	  	  
	  

In	  his	  biography	  James	  Joyce,	  Richard	  Ellmann	  claims	  that,	  “To	  be	  average	  in	  

Ireland	  is	  to	  be	  eccentric”	  (371).	  This	  small,	  seemingly	  innocuous	  line	  references	  
Leopold	  Bloom	  as	  the	  hero	  of	  Joyce’s	  monumental	  novel	  Ulysses.	  These	  ideas	  about	  
what	  it	  means	  to	  be	  “average”	  versus	  “eccentric”	  are	  central	  to	  Joyce’s	  plot.	  His	  main	  
characters,	  Leopold,	  Stephen	  and	  Molly,	  each	  find	  themselves	  separated	  from	  
accepted	  Dublin	  society.	  Although	  “eccentric”	  in	  the	  eyes	  of	  other	  Dubliners,	  men	  
like	  Leopold	  are	  characterized	  by	  traits	  such	  as	  his	  avoidance	  of	  drinking,	  and	  his	  
unusual	  sex	  life	  (voyeurism	  and	  epistolary	  masochism),	  but	  he	  is	  otherwise	  ordinary	  
in	  his	  temperament	  and	  lifestyle.	  Molly,	  less	  your	  typical	  woman,	  withholds	  her	  
inner,	  subjective	  life	  until	  the	  very	  end	  of	  the	  novel.	  Ellmann	  asserts	  that	  this	  
atypical	  depiction	  of	  marriage	  is	  what	  makes	  them	  so	  “eccentric.”	  How	  do	  these	  two	  
ideas	  relate	  to	  each	  other?	  Even	  though	  we’re	  only	  looking	  at	  a	  singular	  day	  in	  their	  
“normal”	  life,	  Joyce	  quickly	  undermines	  any	  false	  notion	  of	  regularity	  within	  this	  
central	  relationship.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

7	  
Richard	  Ellmann	  stresses	  that	  throughout	  the	  process	  of	  writing,	  Joyce	  was	  

reacquainting	  himself	  with	  the	  image	  of	  Dublin	  he	  had	  left	  in	  1904.	  Ellmann	  writes,	  	  
	  
Joyce	  was	  a	  traveler	  by	  nature	  as	  well	  as	  necessity.	  
When	  he	  had	  sufficiently	  complicated	  his	  life	  in	  one	  
place,	  he	  preferred,	  instead	  of	  unraveling	  it,	  to	  move	  on	  
to	  another,	  so	  that	  he	  piled	  involvement	  upon	  
involvement.	  One	  of	  the	  several	  reasons	  for	  his	  high	  
spirits	  on	  leaving	  Dublin	  was	  that	  he	  felt	  he	  had	  been	  
forced	  into	  doing	  what	  he	  liked.	  (189)	  

	  
The	  desire	  to	  travel,	  mixed	  with	  what	  Ellmann	  refers	  to	  as	  “complications,”	  all	  led	  
Joyce	  to	  eventually	  leave	  his	  home	  country	  with	  his	  new	  partner,	  Nora	  Barnacle.	  
This	  desire	  to	  escape	  informs	  Joyce’s	  depiction	  of	  both	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom.	  
These	  consistencies	  between	  life	  and	  work	  are	  one	  reason	  that	  people	  have	  equated	  
the	  events	  and	  characters	  of	  Ulysses	  with	  the	  reality	  that	  was	  James	  Joyce’s	  life.	  His	  
partnership	  with	  Nora	  has	  often	  undergone	  examination	  and	  there	  have	  been	  many	  
attempts	  to	  connect	  this	  relationship	  with	  the	  focal	  marriage	  of	  his	  novel.	  There	  are	  
no	  doubt	  connections	  between	  Nora	  and	  Molly,	  their	  indifference	  to	  intellectual	  life	  
being	  one.	  Molly	  confronts	  Leopold	  about	  his	  insistency	  on	  explaining	  vocabulary	  in	  
a	  convoluted	  manner	  (“Calypso”),	  and	  not	  dissimilarly,	  Nora	  was	  well	  known	  for	  
having	  no	  part	  in	  Joyce’s	  intellectual	  life.	  She	  chose	  to	  never	  read	  the	  copy	  of	  Ulysses	  
that	  Joyce	  gave	  her	  (Ellmann,	  387).	  	  
	  

Moreover,	  in	  keeping	  with	  the	  Blooms’	  unconventional	  marriage,	  Joyce	  and	  

Nora	  spent	  the	  first	  portion	  of	  their	  lives	  together	  unmarried.	  While	  this	  may	  not	  
seem	  like	  a	  pertinent	  detail	  to	  the	  contemporary	  reader,	  in	  early	  twentieth-­‐century	  
Ireland	  it	  was	  almost	  unheard	  of	  for	  a	  young	  woman	  to	  live	  with,	  and	  bear	  children	  

	  

	  
	  

8	  

to,	  a	  man	  she	  had	  not	  married.	  Joyce’s	  relationship	  with	  Nora,	  as	  Ellmann	  saw	  it,	  
seemed	  to	  shape	  the	  way	  he	  thought	  of	  women:	  
Her	  [Nora’s]	  immediate	  response	  to	  him,	  however,	  was	  
not	  befuddled	  but	  self-­‐possessed,	  and	  afterwards	  Joyce	  
liked	  to	  think	  of	  her	  as	  ‘sauntering’	  into	  his	  life,	  a	  
careless	  acceptance	  of	  him	  which	  came	  to	  seem	  an	  
essential	  part	  of	  the	  female	  temperament.	  (165)	  	  
	  
There	  are	  many	  pieces	  of	  this	  statement	  that	  resonate	  when	  relating	  Nora	  to	  Joyce’s	  
eventual	  conception	  of	  Molly	  Bloom	  and	  her	  relationship	  to	  her	  husband	  Leopold.	  
The	  immediate	  response	  Ellmann	  points	  the	  reader	  to,	  Nora’s	  self-­‐assuredness,	  is	  
the	  outstanding	  character	  trait	  that	  connects	  to	  the	  persistence	  seen	  in	  Molly.	  Both	  
women	  were	  emotionally	  stable	  and	  aware	  of	  what	  they	  wanted,	  when	  thrust	  into	  
their	  respective	  marriages.	  The	  image	  of	  Nora	  ‘sauntering’	  into	  his	  life	  gives	  her	  the	  
levelheaded	  image	  of	  a	  woman	  who	  took	  control	  of	  her	  life	  instead	  of	  letting	  society	  
dictate	  that	  life	  for	  her.	  This	  “sauntering,”	  “self-­‐possessed”	  woman	  who	  thought	  of	  
Joyce	  with	  “careless	  acceptance”	  defined	  his	  overall	  view	  of	  women.	  These	  traits	  
could	  easily	  be	  applied	  to	  the	  Molly	  Bloom	  he	  created	  in	  Ulysses.	  Ellmann	  argues	  that	  
these	  impressions	  left	  by	  Nora	  upon	  Joyce	  seemed	  to	  him	  “an	  essential	  part	  of	  the	  
female	  temperament.”	  In	  other	  words,	  Nora	  did	  play	  a	  major	  role	  in	  shaping	  the	  way	  
Joyce	  thought	  about	  and	  understood	  what	  it	  means	  to	  be	  a	  self-­‐assured	  woman.	  	  
	  

Joyce’s	  acquired	  knowledge	  of	  the	  “womanly”	  is,	  we	  find	  out	  later	  in	  the	  

novel,	  what	  Molly	  found	  so	  inherently	  attractive	  in	  the	  young	  Leopold.	  She	  values	  
him	  for	  his	  ability	  to	  “understand	  and	  [feel]	  what	  a	  woman	  is…”	  (Joyce,	  643)	  and	  it	  
seems	  as	  though	  Leopold’s	  understanding	  of	  women	  not	  only	  stems	  from	  his	  

	  

	  
	  

9	  

character	  as	  the	  womanly	  man,	  but	  from	  his	  creator’s	  assumptions	  and	  attitudes	  as	  
well.	  In	  her	  essay,	  “Joyce’s	  Female	  Voices	  in	  Ulysses”,	  Heather	  Cook	  Callow	  claims,	  	  
One	  of	  Joyce’s	  consistent	  interests	  in	  the	  novel	  lies	  in	  
the	  voice	  outside,	  the	  alternative	  voice	  that	  testifies	  to	  
alternative	  realities	  coexisting	  alongside	  the	  
narrative…[We]	  see	  it	  in	  the	  challenge	  of	  female	  
voices…to	  the	  male	  voices	  that	  have	  come	  before.	  (161)	  
	  
This	  “outsider”	  status	  that	  Callow	  refers	  to	  could	  be	  attributed	  to	  both	  Leopold	  and	  
Molly	  Bloom.	  Joyce	  attaches	  this	  “otherness”	  to	  the	  “feminine,”	  immediately	  isolating	  
Molly	  Bloom’s	  voice	  from	  the	  larger	  narrative.	  However,	  upon	  closer	  reading,	  
Bloom’s	  “femininity”	  pushes	  him	  further	  into	  this	  realm	  of	  isolation	  and	  otherness:	  
he’s	  not	  only	  separated	  by	  his	  religion	  and	  social	  choices,	  but	  is	  now	  deemed	  
“womanly.”	  Joyce’s	  interest	  in	  this	  otherness	  and	  how	  it	  relates	  to	  the	  “feminine”	  
stems	  from	  his	  own	  complicated	  relationships	  with	  women,	  romantic	  or	  otherwise.	  
As	  a	  man	  Joyce	  exiled	  himself	  from	  Ireland;	  his	  subsequent	  travels,	  one	  could	  argue,	  
confirmed	  his	  self-­‐identification	  as	  “other,”	  being	  neither	  French,	  Italian,	  Swiss,	  etc.	  
His	  embrace	  of	  this	  kind	  of	  social	  separation	  is	  clearly	  seen	  in	  the	  ways	  both	  Leopold	  
and	  Molly	  Bloom	  are	  treated	  and	  talked	  about	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  Callow’s	  image	  
of	  these	  “alternative	  realities”	  applies	  equally	  to	  their	  roles	  as	  “womanly	  man”	  and	  
“manly	  woman,”	  In	  their	  lives,	  they	  not	  only	  exist	  outside	  of	  Dublin	  society	  as	  Joyce	  
presents	  it,	  they	  also	  exist	  outside	  of	  the	  gender	  performances	  inherent	  within	  this	  
society,	  allowing	  them	  to	  fall	  into	  these	  new,	  previously	  unidentified	  states	  of	  being.	  	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

10	  

1	  
	  
“Beasts	  and	  Fowls”:	  Struggling	  to	  Define	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  Masculine/Feminine	  
Appetites	  	  
	  
Throughout	  his	  novel,	  James	  Joyce	  challenges	  accepted	  ideas	  of	  gender	  and	  
gender	  performances.	  In	  Suzette	  Henke’s	  book	  James	  Joyce	  and	  the	  Politics	  of	  Desire	  
she	  makes	  the	  claim,	  “Femininity	  inhabits	  masculinity,	  inhabits	  it	  as	  otherness,	  as	  its	  
own	  disruption.	  Femininity,	  in	  other	  words,	  is	  pure	  difference,	  a	  signifier,	  and	  so	  is	  
masculinity”	  (110).	  Henke	  confronts	  the	  idea	  that	  femininity	  and	  masculinity	  exist	  
as	  two	  separate	  entities,	  by	  claiming	  that	  instead	  they	  exist	  together	  and	  “inhabit”	  
each	  other.	  What	  is	  deemed	  “traditional”	  in	  Joyce’s	  Dublin,	  when	  thinking	  about	  
gender	  allocates	  only	  two	  extremes,	  the	  “womanly	  woman”	  and	  the	  “manly	  man.”	  
These	  are	  rigid	  expectations;	  a	  woman	  becomes	  one	  who	  embraces	  her	  femininity	  
and	  socially	  submissive	  place	  beneath	  the	  commanding	  and	  assertive	  male.	  Both	  
Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom	  contest	  these	  traditional	  ideas	  of	  gender	  performance.	  
Conventional	  masculine	  and	  feminine	  habits	  are	  put	  into	  conversation,	  allowing	  
Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  “gender”	  to	  evolve	  fluidly	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  	  
	  

Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  not	  a	  conventional	  Irish	  hero.	  He’s	  not	  Catholic	  or	  

Protestant,	  but	  Jewish;	  he	  doesn’t	  enjoy	  drinking	  at	  the	  pub	  with	  his	  peers;	  and	  his	  
masculine	  role	  is	  often	  questioned.	  Joyce	  creates	  a	  space	  where	  Bloom	  lives	  as	  the	  
perpetual	  “other.”	  Suzette	  Henke	  acknowledges	  this	  role	  in	  her	  book,	  claiming	  that	  
Leopold	  Bloom	  occupies	  the	  space	  of	  “womanly	  man,”	  where	  he	  exists	  in	  “those	  
marginal	  spaces	  on	  the	  edge	  of	  societal	  discourse	  usually	  reserved	  for	  
women…”(106).	  By	  immediately	  separating	  Leopold	  Bloom	  from	  what	  could	  be	  

	  

	  
	  

11	  

considered	  the	  “expected”	  Irish	  hero,	  Joyce	  allows	  Bloom	  to	  fall	  into	  this	  space	  and	  
wholly	  occupy	  his	  otherness.	  By	  not	  assigning	  him	  one	  particular	  gender	  role,	  Henke	  
is	  in	  turn	  recognizing	  Bloom’s	  place	  outside	  society’s	  gender	  expectations.	  The	  
function	  of	  gender	  performance	  begins	  to	  define	  how	  Bloom	  relates	  to	  the	  world	  
around	  him.	  	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  role	  as	  “womanly	  man”	  becomes	  integral	  when	  
exploring	  how	  his	  masculinity	  (and	  femininity)	  is	  constructed	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  
Bloom	  occupies	  three	  stereotypically	  “manly”	  roles	  in	  “Calypso:”	  the	  husband,	  the	  
parent,	  and	  the	  carnal	  man.	  	  
	  

The	  most	  prominent	  of	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  roles,	  and	  perhaps	  the	  most	  

conflicted,	  is	  his	  function	  as	  Molly’s	  husband.	  When	  Joyce	  introduces	  the	  Blooms,	  
Leopold	  has	  already	  begun	  his	  day.	  He	  organizes	  breakfast	  and	  tea	  for	  the	  sleepy,	  
elusive	  wife,	  Molly,	  who	  remains	  in	  bed	  the	  entirety	  of	  the	  episode.	  Consequently,	  
the	  marital	  bed	  becomes	  the	  first	  symbol	  of	  their	  estrangement.	  Molly	  exists	  
comfortably	  in	  the	  bed,	  while	  Leopold	  is	  portrayed	  looking	  on	  from	  the	  outside.	  
Joyce	  doesn’t	  allow	  Leopold	  into	  the	  bed	  with	  Molly	  because	  they	  don’t	  physically	  or	  
emotionally	  share	  that	  space.	  Blazes	  Boylan	  has	  usurped	  Bloom’s	  masculine	  role,	  
much	  as	  he	  has	  usurped	  his	  wife.	  Leopold	  Bloom	  acknowledges	  that	  he	  has	  begun	  to	  
lose	  this	  masculine	  role	  and	  feels	  helpless	  to	  prevent	  it,	  	  
A	  soft	  qualm,	  regret,	  flowed	  down	  his	  backbone,	  
increasing.	  Will	  happen,	  yes.	  Prevent.	  Useless:	  can’t	  
move.	  Girl’s	  sweet	  light	  lips.	  Will	  happen	  too.	  He	  felt	  the	  
flowing	  qualm	  spread	  over	  him.	  Useless	  to	  move	  now.	  
Lips	  kissed,	  kissing,	  kissed.	  Full	  gluey	  woman’s	  lips.	  
(“Calypso”,	  55)	  
	  
This	  moment	  shows	  a	  very	  real	  paralysis	  that	  Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  experiencing	  in	  
relation	  to	  Molly’s	  affair.	  The	  inevitability	  of	  her	  rendezvous	  with	  Boylan	  “Will	  
	  

	  
	  

12	  

happen,	  yes.	  Prevent.	  Useless…”	  There	  seems	  to	  be	  two	  connotations	  to	  this	  idea	  of	  
uselessness.	  It’s	  useless	  for	  him	  to	  prevent	  the	  affair,	  obviously,	  and	  perhaps	  as	  both	  
husband	  and	  lover	  he	  feels	  useless.	  Another	  man	  has	  commandeered	  his	  masculine	  
role	  and	  Bloom	  feels	  powerless	  to	  change	  it.	  Another	  significant	  detail	  in	  this	  
passage	  is	  his	  distinction	  between	  “girl’s	  sweet	  light	  lips”	  and	  “full	  gluey	  woman’s	  
lips.”	  These	  two	  sets	  of	  lips	  are	  representative	  of	  his	  daughter	  Milly,	  and	  his	  wife	  
Molly.	  Joyce	  briefly	  introduces	  Milly	  in	  this	  episode	  as	  another	  female	  in	  Bloom’s	  life	  
who	  is	  aging	  into	  a	  young	  woman.	  Her	  physical	  change	  into	  this	  feminine	  role	  
(“sweet	  light	  lips”)	  is	  juxtaposed	  with	  Molly’s	  already	  warped	  body	  (“full	  
gluey…lips”).	  His	  relationship	  to	  each	  of	  these	  women	  changes	  as	  their	  bodies	  
change.	  He	  has	  already	  become	  paralyzed	  as	  a	  husband,	  and	  acknowledges	  a	  similar	  
loss	  as	  Milly	  continues	  to	  age.	  His	  paternal	  role	  begins	  to	  shift	  into	  something	  more	  
maternal,	  accounting	  for	  Molly’s	  own	  distracted	  indifference	  towards	  their	  
daughter.	  	  
	  

Leopold	  Bloom’s	  parental	  role,	  “father,”	  can	  be	  contested	  later	  as	  his	  desire	  to	  

exist	  outside	  the	  “masculine”	  becomes	  clearer.	  Joyce	  begins	  to	  explore	  this	  
fatherhood	  role,	  as	  it	  exists	  parallel	  to	  a	  more	  maternal	  role	  within	  Leopold	  Bloom.	  
Joyce	  immediately	  sets	  up	  juxtaposition	  between	  Leopold	  (father)	  and	  Molly	  
(mother)	  when	  he	  introduces	  Milly	  through	  her	  letter	  correspondence	  with	  each	  
parent.	  It	  becomes	  clear	  that	  Milly	  and	  Leopold	  have	  a	  closer	  relationship	  than	  with	  
Molly.	  However,	  this	  could	  arise	  from	  Molly’s	  personal	  beliefs	  in	  how	  women	  relate	  
to	  each	  other.	  Later	  on	  in	  the	  “Penelope”	  episode	  when	  Molly	  speaks	  about	  other	  
women,	  including	  the	  budding	  Milly,	  it’s	  often	  with	  contempt.	  In	  Carol	  Shloss’	  essay,	  

	  

	  
	  

13	  

“Milly,	  Molly,	  and	  the	  Mullingar	  Photo	  Shop”	  she	  states,	  “…since	  women	  experience	  
themselves	  only	  as	  markers	  in	  male	  cultural	  narratives,	  they	  measure	  themselves	  
according	  to	  their	  successes	  in	  being	  chosen…”	  (Schloss,	  48).	  In	  other	  words,	  they	  
compete	  with	  each	  other	  to	  receive	  and	  retain	  validation	  from	  men.	  With	  this	  idea	  in	  
mind,	  Molly’s	  contempt	  for	  these	  other	  women	  can	  be	  attributed	  to	  this	  feeling	  of	  
competitiveness,	  of	  being	  the	  most	  desirable.	  Her	  fading	  relationship	  with	  Milly	  
seems	  to	  be	  indicative	  of	  Milly’s	  growth	  into	  a	  woman,	  a	  woman	  who’s	  now	  
competing	  in	  the	  same	  world	  as	  Molly.	  Even	  though	  she	  asserts	  that,	  “if	  there	  was	  
anything	  wrong	  it’s	  me	  shed	  tell	  not	  him”	  (Joyce,	  630),	  it’s	  clear	  that	  as	  Milly	  
continues	  to	  grow	  into	  her	  womanhood,	  Molly	  is	  becoming	  more	  aware	  of	  her	  own	  
waning	  beauty,	  as	  seen	  in	  small	  moments	  where	  she	  remarks,	  “they	  all	  look	  at	  her	  
like	  me	  when	  I	  was	  her	  age”	  (631).	  	  
	  

With	  this	  in	  mind,	  when	  their	  respective	  letters	  come,	  Leopold	  reads	  his	  

immediately	  while	  Molly	  glances	  at	  her	  own	  card	  before	  turning	  her	  attention	  to	  
Boylan’s	  waiting	  letter.	  Milly’s	  letter	  troubles	  Leopold.	  He	  is	  seen	  contemplating	  the	  
passage	  of	  time	  and	  her	  hasty	  transition	  from	  girlhood	  to	  womanhood.	  The	  loss	  of	  
Molly’s	  affections	  seems	  to	  parallel	  the	  loss	  of	  Milly’s	  childhood	  innocence,	  	  
…She	  knows	  how	  to	  mind	  herself.	  But	  if	  not?	  No,	  
nothing	  has	  happened.	  Of	  course	  it	  might.	  Wait	  in	  any	  
case	  till	  it	  does.	  A	  wild	  piece	  of	  goods.	  Her	  slim	  legs	  
running	  up	  the	  staircase.	  Destiny.	  Ripening	  now.	  Vain:	  
very.	  (“Calypso”,	  54).	  	  
	  
Leopold	  is	  directly	  confronting	  Milly’s	  movement	  both	  physically	  and	  emotionally	  
away	  from	  him.	  He	  is	  hyperaware	  of	  the	  separation	  between	  them;	  Joyce	  tells	  the	  
reader	  explicitly	  this	  is	  her	  first	  birthday	  away	  from	  home	  that	  she’s	  “coming	  out	  of	  

	  

	  
	  

14	  

her	  shell.”	  His	  worry	  stems	  from	  the	  recognition	  of	  the	  similarities	  between	  Molly	  
and	  Milly.	  She’s	  a	  “wild	  piece	  of	  goods,”	  free-­‐spirited	  like	  her	  mother	  and	  according	  
to	  Bloom,	  very	  vain.	  These	  attributes	  would	  be	  intimidating	  to	  any	  father,	  but	  to	  the	  
already	  usurped	  Leopold	  Bloom,	  Milly’s	  transition	  is	  even	  more	  threatening.	  He’s	  
losing	  both	  women	  in	  his	  life,	  complicating	  his	  roles	  as	  husband	  and	  father.	  
However,	  it’s	  not	  only	  losing	  Milly	  that	  complicates	  these	  performative	  gender	  roles.	  
Molly	  has	  alienated	  herself	  from	  the	  role	  of	  mother,	  therefore	  Bloom	  has	  taken	  it	  
upon	  himself	  to	  act	  as	  both	  masculine	  and	  feminine	  parental	  figures.	  	  
	  

The	  last	  of	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  pivotal	  characteristics	  introduced	  in	  this	  episode	  

is	  his	  role	  as	  the	  carnal	  man.	  The	  first	  introduction	  we	  have	  of	  Bloom	  is	  when	  Joyce	  
writes,	  “Mr.	  Leopold	  Bloom	  ate	  with	  relish	  the	  inner	  organs	  of	  beasts	  and	  fowls”	  
(45).	  This	  is	  an	  important	  description	  of	  Bloom	  because	  it	  asserts	  his	  affinity	  for	  
consuming	  flesh	  “with	  relish.”	  Joyce	  immediately	  introduces	  Bloom	  as	  a	  carnivorous	  
man,	  who	  takes	  pleasure	  in	  the	  consumption	  of	  meat.	  For	  arguments	  sake,	  this	  meat	  
is	  not	  always	  literal	  like	  the	  kidney	  he	  buys	  but	  also	  figurative,	  such	  as	  the	  meaty	  
legs	  and	  behind	  of	  the	  woman	  in	  the	  butcher’s	  shop.	  	  
	  

This	  woman	  is	  the	  first	  of	  many	  intangible	  strangers	  Leopold	  Bloom	  has	  

lascivious	  thoughts	  about.	  He	  rushes	  himself	  in	  the	  butchers	  shop	  “To	  catch	  up	  and	  
walk	  behind	  her	  if	  she	  went	  slowly,	  behind	  her	  moving	  hams…”	  (49).	  Bloom	  equates	  
the	  woman	  from	  the	  shop	  with	  butchered	  meat,	  meat	  that	  is	  ready	  to	  be	  consumed.	  
It’s	  small	  moments	  like	  this	  that	  keep	  him	  moving	  throughout	  the	  day,	  these	  brief	  
instances	  where	  he	  is	  able	  to	  walk	  behind	  a	  woman	  and	  admire	  her	  as	  a	  slab	  of	  
meat.	  This	  outlook	  on	  women,	  however,	  is	  not	  reserved	  for	  strangers	  alone;	  he	  even	  

	  

	  
	  

15	  

refers	  to	  Molly	  as	  having	  “bedwarmed	  flesh,”	  a	  parallel,	  perhaps,	  to	  the	  organs	  of	  
beasts	  he	  enjoys.	  Joyce’s	  use	  of	  the	  word	  “flesh”	  instead	  of	  something	  more	  
mundane	  like	  “skin”	  emphasizes	  Bloom’s	  animalistic	  appetite.	  His	  physical	  intake	  of	  
internal	  organs	  directly	  contrasts	  his	  inability	  to	  satiate	  his	  sexual	  appetites.	  	  
	  

It	  is	  important	  for	  Joyce	  to	  set	  up	  Leopold	  Bloom	  in	  these	  three	  prominent	  

masculine	  roles,	  because	  in	  this	  first	  episode	  the	  space	  Bloom	  occupies	  within	  the	  
wider	  society	  of	  Dublin	  has	  yet	  to	  be	  recognized.	  In	  his	  household	  we	  immediately	  
know	  as	  a	  husband	  he’s	  been	  usurped.	  As	  a	  father	  he’s	  losing	  Milly	  to	  age	  and	  as	  a	  
carnal	  man	  he	  consumes	  only	  with	  his	  mind.	  None	  of	  these	  masculine	  roles	  are	  fully	  
embraced	  by	  Bloom.	  This	  is	  where	  we	  return	  to	  Henke’s	  idea	  of	  the	  “womanly	  man,”	  
and	  how	  Leopold	  Bloom	  occupies	  this	  vague	  un-­‐gendered	  space	  on	  the	  margins	  of	  
society.	  Joyce	  creates	  a	  space	  where	  Leopold	  Bloom	  wanders	  through	  Dublin	  
attempting	  to	  satiate	  his	  “manly”	  and	  “womanly”	  desires	  as	  these	  conventional	  ideas	  
of	  gender	  begin	  to	  evolve.	  	  
When	  exploring	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  constructed	  and	  contested	  gender	  it’s	  
imperative	  to	  remember	  that	  gender	  isn’t	  only	  a	  social	  construct	  but	  a	  biological	  
one.	  This	  may	  seem	  like	  an	  obvious	  point	  to	  make,	  but	  when	  talking	  about	  
femininity	  and	  masculinity	  as	  ideological	  concepts	  it’s	  important	  to	  recognize	  that	  
Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  physically	  male.	  His	  sexual	  desires	  arise	  from	  this	  body	  and	  how	  
Leopold	  chooses	  to	  relate	  to	  his	  male	  anatomy	  becomes	  essential	  to	  how	  he	  defines	  
his	  own	  masculine	  role	  within	  the	  novel.	  In	  “Lotus	  Eaters,”	  Joyce	  allows	  his	  audience	  
a	  glimpse	  at	  Bloom’s	  life	  outside	  the	  domestic,	  “feminine	  space”	  of	  his	  home.	  
Leopold’s	  previously	  discussed	  role	  as	  “womanly	  man”	  becomes	  hidden	  as	  he	  

	  

	  
	  

16	  

performs	  the	  societal	  “male”	  role	  that	  is	  expected	  of	  him.	  It	  can	  be	  argued	  that	  out	  
on	  the	  streets,	  even	  though	  he	  does	  not	  wholly	  exist	  as	  “man”,	  he	  chooses	  to	  inhabit	  
this	  singular	  gender.	  This	  choice	  creates	  conflict	  within	  Leopold,	  who	  ponders	  the	  
physicality	  of	  his	  masculinity	  and	  the	  pretenses	  that	  it	  creates.	  	  
A	  crucial	  moment	  for	  Bloom	  occurs	  at	  the	  close	  of	  “Lotus	  Eaters,”	  	  	  
He	  foresaw	  his	  pale	  body	  reclined	  in	  it	  at	  full,	  naked,	  in	  a	  
womb	  of	  warmth…	  He	  saw	  his	  trunk	  and	  limbs	  
riprippled	  over	  and	  sustained,	  buoyed	  lightly	  upward,	  
lemonyellow:	  his	  naval,	  bud	  of	  flesh:	  saw	  the	  dark	  
tangled	  curls	  of	  his	  bush…floating	  hair	  of	  the	  stream	  
around	  the	  limp	  father	  of	  thousands,	  a	  languid	  floating	  
flower.	  (71)	  
	  
This	  small	  passage	  creates	  a	  number	  of	  essential	  images.	  The	  relationship	  seen	  here	  
is	  an	  intimate	  one	  between	  a	  man	  and	  his	  body.	  The	  image	  is	  serene,	  peaceful;	  
Bloom	  thinks	  of	  himself	  as	  back	  in	  the	  womb.	  It’s	  an	  interesting	  combination	  of	  
images,	  the	  femininity	  of	  the	  womb	  and	  the	  masculinity	  of	  his	  genitalia.	  It	  shows	  the	  
melding	  of	  these	  two	  aspects	  of	  Bloom;	  his	  gender	  bent	  feminine	  and	  masculine	  
desires.	  Bloom’s	  last	  thought,	  “the	  limp	  father	  of	  thousands”	  is	  retrospective	  about	  
where	  he’s	  been	  previously	  in	  this	  episode.	  The	  limpness	  evokes	  an	  inadequacy,	  in	  
spite	  being	  the	  (masturbatory)	  “father	  of	  thousands;”	  his	  masculine	  body	  floats	  in	  
front	  of	  him	  and	  remains	  useless.	  Lisa	  Rado	  analyzes	  this	  scene	  perceptively,	  	  
This…image	  reflects	  his	  own	  confusion	  about	  his	  sexual	  
and	  personal	  identity,	  as	  it	  suggests	  at	  the	  same	  time	  
both	  impotence	  and	  transcendence…	  the	  limpness	  of	  
the	  phallus	  seems	  to	  indicate	  loss	  of	  masculinity	  and	  
male	  procreative	  power.	  However,	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  
penis	  resembles	  a	  wet	  “floating	  flower”	  –the	  flower	  
being	  a	  traditionally	  positive	  metaphor	  for	  female	  
genitalia	  –reworks	  the	  initial	  symbol	  of	  impotence	  into	  
one	  of	  potential	  luxuriant	  and	  fertile	  sexuality	  and	  
beauty.	  (Rado,	  3)	  	  
	  

	  
	  

17	  

	  
This	  short	  passage	  reiterates	  some	  of	  the	  ideas	  previously	  stated	  when	  looking	  at	  
this	  final	  passage	  in	  “Lotus	  Eaters.”	  It’s	  clear	  that	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  gender	  identity	  is	  
confusing	  and	  something	  he	  struggles	  with	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  The	  point	  of	  this	  
confusion	  can	  be	  traced	  to	  his	  male	  anatomy,	  the	  part	  of	  him	  that	  Rado	  claims	  is	  lost,	  
his	  limp	  phallus	  a	  symbol	  of	  his	  absent	  “procreative	  power.”	  The	  contrast	  between	  
this	  loss	  of	  identity	  and	  the	  security	  he	  feels	  in	  the	  feminine	  space	  seems	  to	  be	  the	  
pinnacle	  of	  his	  blurring	  gender	  roles.	  He	  floats	  between	  the	  two,	  never	  fully	  aligned	  
with	  either	  gendered	  performance.	  As	  Rado	  points	  out,	  his	  wavering	  masculinity	  
becomes	  overshadowed	  and	  changed	  into	  a	  celebration	  of	  a	  flourishing	  female	  
sexuality.	  This	  then	  becomes	  a	  major	  conflict	  in	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  search	  for	  gender	  
identity.	  While	  he	  attempts	  to	  cope	  with	  his	  irresolute	  masculine	  roles	  he	  must	  also	  
come	  to	  terms	  with	  his	  accessible	  femininity.	  	  
There	  are	  two	  moments	  in	  “Lotus	  Eaters”	  where	  Leopold	  ponders	  a	  lack	  of	  
male	  genitalia	  where	  it	  should	  be,	  in	  gelded	  horses	  and	  eunuchs.	  When	  he	  looks	  at	  
the	  horses	  he	  thinks,	  “Gelded	  too:	  a	  stump	  of	  black	  guttapercha	  wagging	  limp	  
between	  their	  haunches.	  Might	  be	  happy	  all	  the	  same	  that	  way.	  Good	  poor	  brutes	  
they	  look”	  (63).	  This	  first	  instance	  of	  male	  genital	  mutilation	  occurs	  in	  animals,	  
something	  anatomically	  different	  from	  Bloom	  but	  somehow	  related	  nonetheless.	  
The	  image	  of	  the	  “stump”	  is	  graphic,	  the	  remnants	  of	  what	  used	  to	  be	  masculine	  and	  
powerful	  reduced	  to	  this	  thing,	  “wagging	  limp	  between	  their	  haunches”.	  The	  
physical	  impotence	  of	  the	  male	  horses	  could	  mirror	  a	  similar	  feeling	  of	  
incompetence	  Bloom	  feels.	  While	  Bloom	  is	  not	  physically	  incapable	  of	  sexual	  arousal	  
and	  action,	  his	  failures	  come	  from	  the	  idea	  that	  he’s	  no	  longer	  the	  man	  pleasing	  his	  
	  

	  
	  

18	  

wife.	  His	  physical	  role	  has	  been	  taken	  over	  by	  Blazes	  Boylan,	  a	  man	  who	  perhaps	  has	  
emotionally	  gelded	  Leopold.	  Leopold	  doesn’t	  dwell	  on	  the	  animals	  lack	  of	  genitalia;	  
he	  instead	  chooses	  to	  believe	  that	  they’re	  “happy	  all	  the	  same.”	  In	  Bloom’s	  mind	  
perhaps	  life	  can	  go	  on	  without	  that	  aspect	  of	  one’s	  self,	  he	  can	  become	  unfettered	  by	  
those	  organs	  and	  the	  pretenses	  they	  create.	  	  
	  However,	  this	  feeling	  takes	  a	  notable	  turn	  when	  he	  confronts	  other	  gelded	  
men,	  eunuchs.	  In	  this	  instance	  he	  thinks	  about	  the	  act	  of	  losing	  one’s	  genitals,	  
“Suppose	  they	  wouldn’t	  feel	  anything	  after.	  Kind	  of	  placid.	  No	  worry…Who	  knows?	  
Eunuch.	  One	  way	  out	  of	  it”	  (67).	  He	  is	  clearly	  able	  to	  identify	  more	  directly	  towards	  
these	  men,	  who	  like	  the	  horses,	  have	  been	  deprived	  of	  their	  physical	  “manhood”.	  	  
While	  the	  horses	  were	  “poor	  old	  brutes”,	  these	  eunuchs	  seem	  to	  appeal	  to	  Leopold	  
on	  some	  emotional	  level.	  Their	  life	  after	  is	  “placid”,	  peaceful	  and	  without	  worry.	  
What	  stands	  out	  most	  is	  his	  assertion	  at	  the	  end	  that	  it’s	  “one	  way	  out	  of	  it.”	  These	  
small	  moments	  allow	  the	  reader	  to	  see	  Leopold	  Bloom	  attempting	  to	  come	  to	  terms	  
with	  the	  role	  of	  his	  male	  anatomy.	  When	  he	  thinks	  that	  losing	  your	  testicles	  can	  be	  
“one	  way	  out	  of	  it,”	  he	  could	  be	  talking	  about	  the	  uncertainty	  of	  his	  own	  sex	  life.	  He	  
feels	  gelded	  and	  cuckolded	  by	  Blazes	  Boylan,	  the	  man	  who’s	  taken	  over	  providing	  
sexual	  relief	  to	  Molly.	  He’s	  looking	  for	  an	  emotional	  escape	  from	  the	  realization	  that	  
his	  masculine	  role	  is	  being	  contested	  and	  overpowered.	  	  
A	  prominent	  part	  of	  this	  chapter	  deals	  with	  a	  way	  he’s	  attempted	  to	  satiate	  
this	  desire	  to	  escape	  the	  confines	  of	  his	  gender	  and	  his	  biology.	  This	  is	  the	  first	  
episode	  in	  which	  Joyce	  introduces	  Martha,	  Leopold’s	  own	  “affair”	  of	  sorts.	  We	  don’t	  
know	  a	  lot	  about	  her	  except	  that	  she	  answered	  an	  ad	  Leopold	  put	  out	  in	  the	  paper	  

	  

	  
	  

19	  

and	  is	  generally	  an	  enthusiastic	  pen	  pal.	  The	  immediate	  difference	  between	  
Leopold’s	  affair	  and	  Molly’s	  is	  that	  Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  conversing	  purely	  through	  
letters,	  while	  Molly’s	  actions	  are	  obviously	  more	  physical.	  However,	  it’s	  clear	  that	  
the	  correspondence	  between	  Leopold	  and	  Martha	  has	  become	  increasingly	  sexual.	  
In	  her	  letter	  Martha	  writes,	  	  
…I	  called	  you	  naughty	  boy	  because	  I	  do	  not	  like	  that	  
other	  world.	  Please	  tell	  me	  what	  is	  the	  real	  meaning	  of	  
that	  word?	  Are	  you	  not	  happy	  in	  your	  home	  you	  poor	  
little	  naughty	  boy?	  I	  do	  wish	  I	  could	  do	  something	  for	  
you…I	  think	  of	  you	  so	  often	  you	  have	  no	  idea.	  I	  have	  
never	  felt	  myself	  so	  much	  drawn	  to	  a	  man	  as	  
you…Please	  write	  me	  a	  long	  letter	  …you	  naughty	  boy…	  
(63-­‐64)	  

	  
Before	  opening	  the	  letter	  Leopold	  seemed	  nervous	  about	  what	  could	  be	  contained,	  
worrying	  that	  she	  may	  be	  “annoyed”	  or	  put	  off	  somehow	  by	  the	  contents	  of	  his	  last	  
letter.	  This	  leads	  one	  to	  believe	  that	  these	  letters	  have	  gotten	  increasingly	  risqué	  
and	  Bloom	  was	  nervous	  that	  he	  had	  “gone	  too	  far	  last	  time.”	  Their	  correspondence	  is	  
becoming	  intimate,	  making	  Leopold	  nervous	  about	  Martha’s	  expectations	  and	  also	  
pushing	  Martha’s	  own	  desires	  along.	  She	  seems	  to	  enjoy	  the	  playfulness	  of	  their	  
relationship,	  constantly	  referring	  to	  him	  as	  a	  “naughty	  boy,”	  coy	  and	  flirtatious.	  
However,	  she’s	  also	  preoccupied	  with	  his	  home	  life,	  understanding	  he	  has	  a	  troubled	  
relationship	  with	  his	  wife.	  Perhaps	  Martha’s	  letter	  is	  indicative	  of	  Shloss’	  idea	  that	  
was	  explored	  earlier,	  highlighting	  these	  feelings	  of	  competitiveness	  between	  
women.	  Even	  though	  Martha	  has	  never	  met	  or	  seen	  Molly,	  she’s	  seeking	  Leopold’s	  
validation.	  Asking	  about	  his	  troubled	  relationship	  allows	  her	  to	  gain	  that	  
confirmation.	  Martha’s	  preoccupation	  doesn’t	  seem	  to	  offend	  Bloom	  in	  any	  way,	  but	  

	  

	  
	  

20	  

his	  actions	  after	  opening	  the	  letter	  and	  her	  sentiments	  contained	  within	  it	  lead	  the	  
reader	  to	  believe	  their	  feelings	  are	  not	  mutual.	  	  
	  

Martha	  expresses	  an	  unrelenting	  desire	  to	  meet	  Leopold.	  Her	  affections	  are	  

expressed	  through	  her	  flirtatious	  use	  of	  the	  word	  “naughty”	  and	  she	  explicitly	  says,	  
“I	  have	  never	  felt	  myself	  so	  much	  drawn	  to	  a	  man	  as	  you…”	  These	  romanticisms	  
show	  the	  simplicity	  of	  Martha,	  an	  otherwise	  mysterious	  woman	  who	  we	  only	  know	  
through	  this	  singular,	  grammatically	  incorrect	  letter.	  This	  letter	  from	  Martha	  raises	  
many	  questions	  about	  her	  and	  Leopold’s	  relationship.	  One	  of	  the	  most	  immediate	  is	  
why	  it	  exists	  at	  all?	  Leopold,	  as	  mentioned	  before,	  is	  attempting	  to	  find	  an	  escape	  
from	  his	  cuckolded	  life.	  He’s	  found	  this	  escape	  through	  Martha,	  but	  we	  have	  no	  
information	  about	  how	  long	  or	  how	  in	  depth	  this	  correspondence	  has	  come.	  The	  
relationship	  seems	  to	  be	  his	  own	  way	  of	  asserting	  his	  male	  domination,	  taking	  back	  
his	  masculine	  power	  and	  tempting	  a	  new	  woman.	  However,	  Leopold	  doesn’t	  seem	  to	  
share	  Martha’s	  desire	  that	  they	  meet.	  This	  leads	  one	  to	  believe	  that	  even	  though	  
Leopold	  is	  trying	  to	  relate	  to	  and	  embrace	  his	  masculinity,	  he	  doesn’t	  want	  to	  
physically	  copulate	  with	  another	  woman.	  	  
	  

The	  juxtaposition	  between	  Leopold’s	  Bloom	  preoccupation	  with	  masculine	  

anatomy	  and	  that	  anatomy’s	  removal	  and	  the	  relief	  of	  that	  removal	  to	  provide	  “one	  
way	  out	  of	  it”	  all	  encompass	  his	  hesitance	  to	  engage	  physically	  with	  Martha	  or	  any	  
other	  woman.	  As	  a	  man	  he’s	  faced	  with	  his	  very	  real	  and	  present	  physical	  desire	  for	  
women,	  except	  he	  cannot	  seem	  to	  act	  upon	  these	  desires.	  Whether	  it’s	  because	  of	  
Molly	  or	  some	  other	  reason,	  we	  don’t	  see	  him	  engage	  in	  any	  physical	  sexual	  act	  until	  
“Nausicaa.”	  	  However	  even	  that	  act	  remains	  very	  detached	  and	  unemotional.	  	  

	  

	  
	  

21	  

“Nausicaa”	  is	  an	  important	  chapter	  when	  exploring	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  sexuality	  and	  
gender,	  because	  it	  asserts	  Bloom’s	  role	  as	  a	  masculine	  character.	  	  This	  chapter	  
features	  the	  only	  explicit	  sexual	  act	  contained	  within	  the	  entire	  novel,	  one	  that	  takes	  
place	  between	  Leopold	  and	  Gerty	  MacDowell.	  Due	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  we	  see	  a	  very	  
physical	  sexual	  release	  from	  Leopold,	  it’s	  important	  to	  pay	  attention	  to	  the	  
conditions	  surrounding	  his	  act	  of	  masturbation	  and	  the	  unspoken	  relationship	  he	  
and	  Gerty	  form.	  	  
	  

When	  Gerty	  is	  introduced	  she’s	  depicted	  as	  a	  virginal	  beauty.	  Joyce	  writes,	  

“The	  waxen	  pallor	  of	  her	  face	  was	  almost	  spiritual	  in	  its	  ivorylike	  purity	  though	  her	  
rosebud	  mouth	  was	  a	  genuine	  Cupid’s	  bow,	  Greekly	  perfect”	  (286).	  The	  divine	  
nature	  of	  her	  attractiveness	  is	  reiterated	  here.	  Joyce	  uses	  words	  like	  “spiritual”	  and	  
“purity”	  to	  create	  a	  sense	  of	  innocence	  that	  surrounds	  Gerty.	  She’s	  later	  described	  as	  
wearing	  a	  blue	  blouse,	  the	  color	  the	  Virgin	  Mary	  was	  most	  often	  represented	  
wearing.	  	  All	  of	  these	  characteristics	  evoke	  the	  ideal	  Irish	  woman,	  young,	  pure,	  and	  
healthy.	  The	  fact	  that	  Joyce	  combines	  this	  divine	  quality	  to	  her	  beauty	  and	  Bloom’s	  
masturbation	  is	  a	  jarring	  comparison.	  	  Leopold	  Bloom	  plainly	  masturbates	  to	  the	  
image	  of	  the	  Virgin	  Mary.	  	  
	  

Another	  essential	  facet	  to	  this	  episode	  is	  that	  it	  provides	  one	  of	  the	  rare	  

glimpses	  into	  a	  biologically	  female	  psyche.	  Aside	  from	  Molly’s	  soliloquy	  at	  the	  end	  of	  
the	  novel,	  this	  is	  the	  only	  place	  Joyce	  chooses	  to	  again	  reveal	  the	  inner	  dialogue	  of	  an	  
Irish	  woman.	  However,	  unlike	  the	  pensive	  and	  fiery	  Molly,	  Gerty	  offers	  a	  different	  
sort	  of	  inner	  monologue.	  The	  innocence	  Joyce	  evokes	  in	  her	  appearance	  is	  reflected	  
in	  the	  way	  her	  thoughts	  meander	  onto	  the	  page.	  Her	  concerns	  revolve	  around	  boys,	  

	  

	  
	  

22	  

being	  liked,	  being	  hurt	  and	  the	  company	  she	  keeps.	  As	  Bloom	  approaches	  the	  scene,	  
Gerty	  is	  daydreaming	  of	  her	  ideal	  man,	  	  
No	  prince	  charming	  is	  her	  beau	  ideal	  to	  lay	  a	  rare	  and	  
wondrous	  love	  at	  her	  feet	  but	  rather	  a	  manly	  man	  with	  
a	  strong	  quiet	  face	  who	  had	  not	  found	  his	  ideal,	  perhaps	  
his	  hair	  slightly	  flecked	  with	  grey,	  and	  who	  would	  
understand,	  take	  her	  in	  his	  sheltering	  arms,	  strain	  her	  
to	  him	  in	  all	  the	  strength	  of	  his	  deep	  passionate	  nature	  
and	  comfort	  her	  with	  a	  long	  long	  kiss.	  (288)	  
	  
In	  this	  passage	  we	  glimpse	  at	  what	  Gerty	  desires	  amongst	  all	  else,	  to	  be	  swept	  off	  
her	  feet	  by	  some	  mysterious,	  foreign	  stranger.	  Gerty’s	  stereotypically	  female	  looks	  
are	  reflected	  in	  her	  craving	  for	  romance,	  a	  stereotypically	  “female”	  longing.	  Her	  
desires	  are	  not	  too	  different	  than	  Leopold	  Bloom’s,	  the	  yearning	  for	  some	  intimate	  
connection	  to	  distract	  them	  from	  otherwise	  mundane	  wanderings.	  In	  a	  sense,	  Bloom	  
reflects	  this	  stranger	  that	  Gerty	  thirsts	  for.	  He’s	  not	  a	  typical	  “Irishmen”,	  his	  dark	  
looks	  reflect	  his	  Jewishness,	  and	  he’s	  certainly	  older	  than	  she	  is.	  When	  she	  first	  
notices	  Bloom	  watching	  her	  she	  thinks,	  “by	  his	  dark	  eyes	  and	  pale	  intellectual	  
face…he	  was	  a	  foreigner…He	  was	  in	  deep	  mourning,	  she	  could	  see	  that,	  and	  the	  
story	  of	  a	  haunting	  sorrow	  was	  written	  on	  his	  face.	  She	  would	  have	  given	  worlds	  to	  
know	  what	  it	  was”	  (293).	  As	  a	  young	  romantic	  she	  wants	  to	  share	  his	  misery,	  she	  
glamorizes	  his	  pain,	  making	  it	  something	  alluring	  instead	  of	  painful.	  Bloom	  exists	  as	  
a	  temporary	  figure	  of	  her	  imagination,	  encompassing	  everything	  she	  desires,	  which	  
directly	  parallels	  the	  role	  Gerty	  plays	  for	  Bloom.	  Like	  Gerty,	  Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  
performing	  this	  “feminine”	  desire,	  the	  desire	  for	  a	  romantic	  connection.	  	  
	  

We	  already	  know	  Gerty	  exists	  as	  a	  coveted	  young	  beauty.	  However	  at	  the	  end	  

of	  the	  episode	  it’s	  revealed	  that	  Gerty	  is	  also	  suffering	  from	  an	  ailment	  (not	  

	  

	  
	  

23	  

emotional,	  but	  physical).	  Joyce	  transitions	  back	  into	  Bloom’s	  consciousness	  and	  
writes,	  	  
Gerty	  MacDowell	  was…No!	  She’s	  lame!	  O!	  Mr.	  Bloom	  
watched	  her	  as	  she	  limped	  away.	  Poor	  girl!	  That’s	  why	  
she’s	  left	  on	  the	  shelf…thought	  something	  was	  wrong	  by	  
the	  cut	  of	  her	  jib.	  Jilted	  beauty!	  A	  defect	  is	  ten	  times	  
worse	  in	  a	  woman…Glad	  I	  didn’t	  know	  when	  she	  was	  on	  
show.	  (301).	  	  
	  
This	  realization	  of	  her	  lameness	  and	  Bloom’s	  reaction	  shows	  a	  disturbing	  difference	  
between	  the	  way	  men	  and	  women	  react	  towards	  suffering.	  In	  Gerty’s	  mind	  Bloom’s	  
suffering	  is	  a	  window	  into	  his	  troubled,	  romantic	  life.	  She	  wants	  to	  know	  everything	  
about	  his	  pain	  and	  share	  it	  with	  him.	  In	  this	  passage	  we	  see	  something	  quite	  
different.	  Bloom	  is	  actually	  repelled	  by	  her	  physical	  disability.	  His	  reaction	  to	  her	  
“lameness”	  has	  humanized	  her,	  brought	  her	  down	  from	  the	  divine	  pedestal	  into	  the	  
reality	  that	  is	  Joyce’s	  Dublin.	  Joyce	  raises	  an	  interesting	  contradiction	  here	  between	  
male	  and	  female	  incapacity.	  Throughout	  the	  novel	  we	  are	  confronted	  with	  Bloom’s	  
physical	  incapability,	  revolving	  around	  his	  faltering	  sex	  life	  with	  his	  wife.	  However,	  
as	  Bloom	  states,	  “a	  defect	  is	  ten	  times	  worse	  in	  a	  woman,”	  meaning	  that	  even	  though	  
Gerty	  is	  clearly	  not	  incapacitated	  because	  of	  her	  foot,	  she	  is	  no	  longer	  able	  to	  occupy	  
the	  space	  of	  the	  “ideal	  Irish	  woman.”	  	  
	  

It	  was	  easier	  for	  Bloom	  to	  feel	  sexually	  connected	  to	  Gerty	  before	  this	  

“humanization”	  due	  to	  her	  lameness	  because	  as	  a	  coveted	  object	  of	  desire	  she	  
remained	  unobtainable.	  This	  elusive	  role	  she	  existed	  in	  made	  it	  easier	  for	  Bloom	  to	  
complete	  his	  sexual	  act	  because	  he	  was	  able	  to	  remain	  separate	  from	  her	  as	  a	  real	  
person.	  This	  estrangement	  relates	  back	  to	  his	  earlier	  communications	  with	  Martha,	  
who	  he	  also	  refuses	  to	  interact	  with	  on	  a	  personal	  level.	  Bloom	  is	  obviously	  trying	  to	  
	  

	  
	  

24	  

remain	  apart	  from	  any	  real	  sexual	  relationship.	  He’s	  refusing	  to	  meet	  Martha	  and	  
only	  watched	  Gerty	  from	  a	  distance,	  romanticizing	  her	  role	  as	  an	  intangible	  sexual	  
partner.	  	  
	  

Aside	  from	  the	  fleeting	  connection	  both	  Gerty	  and	  Bloom	  experience,	  the	  

physical	  act	  itself	  cannot	  be	  overlooked.	  As	  mentioned	  before,	  “Nausicaa”	  is	  the	  only	  
point	  in	  the	  entire	  novel	  where	  there	  is	  any	  sort	  of	  physical	  sex	  act,	  in	  this	  case,	  
masturbation.	  Sex	  is	  often	  alluded	  to	  and	  even	  apart	  of	  hallucinations	  later	  in	  
“Circe,”	  but	  nobody	  actually	  orgasms	  as	  Bloom	  does	  here.	  	  The	  masturbatory	  act	  
itself	  is	  described	  metaphorically	  through	  a	  fireworks	  show.	  It’s	  ascribed	  to	  how	  the	  
“rocket	  sprang	  and	  bang	  shot	  blind…the	  Roman	  candle	  burst	  and	  it	  was	  like	  a	  sigh	  of	  
O!	  …It	  gushed	  out	  of	  it	  a	  stream	  of	  rain	  gold	  hair	  threads…”(300).	  	  The	  comparison	  
between	  Bloom’s	  ejaculation	  and	  the	  fireworks	  is	  interesting	  because	  of	  the	  very	  
public	  nature	  of	  each.	  Everyone	  is	  preoccupied	  with	  the	  grandeur	  and	  beauty	  of	  the	  
fireworks,	  and	  Joyce	  then	  connects	  this	  grandeur	  with	  Bloom’s	  own	  expulsion	  of	  
bodily	  fluids.	  	  
	  

The	  opulence	  of	  Bloom’s	  ejaculation	  can	  be	  seen	  as	  a	  “manly”	  act.	  In	  Gerty’s	  

mind	  she	  views	  him	  as	  this	  “manly	  man”	  that	  will	  come	  to	  take	  her	  into	  his	  arms	  and	  
love	  her,	  however,	  the	  act	  of	  masturbation	  is	  another	  kind	  of	  manly	  act	  that	  Bloom	  
occupies	  in	  the	  episode.	  It	  shows	  the	  more	  masculine	  nature	  of	  Bloom,	  something	  
briefly	  seen	  in	  “Lotus	  Eaters”	  when	  he’s	  relating	  to	  his	  own	  male	  body.	  In	  this	  
episode	  he	  not	  only	  contemplates	  what	  it	  means	  to	  be	  a	  man	  biologically,	  he	  
participates	  in	  an	  act	  directly	  related	  to	  that	  male	  body.	  The	  discomfort	  he	  considers	  
in	  “Lotus	  Eaters”	  when	  he	  thinks	  about	  gelded	  horses	  and	  Eunuchs	  is	  literally	  

	  

	  
	  

25	  

expelled	  from	  him	  in	  these	  moments.	  This	  physical	  release	  doesn’t	  deter	  Bloom	  
from	  continuing	  to	  dwell	  on	  Molly’s	  impending	  affair	  but	  there	  seems	  to	  be	  some	  
sort	  of	  consolation	  he	  feels	  towards	  the	  end	  of	  the	  episode.	  	  
Thinking	  back	  on	  his	  interaction	  with	  Gerty,	  Bloom	  thinks,	  “Chance.	  We’ll	  
never	  meet	  again.	  But	  it	  was	  lovely.	  Goodbye,	  dear.	  Thanks.	  Made	  me	  feel	  so	  young”	  
(312).	  Bloom	  has	  resigned	  himself	  to	  the	  events	  that	  have	  transpired	  on	  the	  beach,	  
knowing	  this	  interaction	  was	  fleeting	  but	  happy	  it	  occurred	  nonetheless.	  Just	  like	  
Gerty	  fantasized	  about	  Bloom	  and	  enjoyed	  creating	  a	  story	  around	  him,	  Bloom	  was	  
also	  able	  to	  enjoy	  the	  momentary	  nature	  of	  this	  relationship.	  For	  Gerty	  it	  gave	  her	  
hope	  that	  her	  “beau	  ideal”,	  that	  dark	  mysterious	  stranger,	  exists	  somewhere,	  ready	  
to	  whisk	  her	  away.	  In	  Bloom’s	  mind	  he	  was	  able	  to	  forget	  for	  a	  moment	  his	  troubles	  
and	  was	  able	  to	  “feel	  so	  young.”	  This	  episode	  seems	  to	  have	  acted	  as	  both	  a	  physical	  
and	  temporarily	  emotional	  release	  for	  Bloom	  during	  his	  daily	  wanderings.	  In	  a	  novel	  
where	  he	  often	  exists	  between	  manly	  and	  womanly	  desires,	  this	  episode	  emphasizes	  
a	  more	  masculine,	  a	  more	  commanding	  Leopold	  Bloom.	  The	  outside	  world	  briefly	  
disappeared,	  as	  he	  was	  seduced	  and	  relieved	  by	  the	  young	  and	  innocent	  Gerty	  
MacDowell.	  	  
If	  “Nausicaa”	  acts	  as	  Joyce’s	  declaration	  of	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  role	  as	  a	  man	  
within	  the	  novel,	  “Circe”	  certainly	  acts	  as	  an	  assertion	  of	  his	  femininity.	  This	  
movement	  returns	  to	  Suzette	  Henke’s	  ideas	  about	  how	  masculinity	  exists	  within	  
femininity	  and	  vice	  versa.	  Her	  idea	  of	  the	  “womanly	  man”	  becomes	  pertinent	  when	  
exploring	  Bloom’s	  abrupt	  transformation	  from	  male	  to	  female	  in	  “Circe.”	  Before	  
delving	  into	  the	  contents	  of	  this	  episode,	  it’s	  important	  to	  recognize	  the	  way	  Joyce	  

	  

	  
	  

26	  

chooses	  to	  attack	  the	  question	  of	  gender	  that	  arises	  within	  this	  chapter.	  The	  
previously	  discussed	  idea	  of	  gender	  performance	  transforms	  from	  a	  concept	  to	  
something	  that’s	  actually	  happening	  on	  the	  page.	  Joyce	  chooses	  to	  write	  this	  episode	  
in	  the	  style	  of	  a	  play.	  Gender	  performance	  becomes	  an	  actual	  performance,	  allowing	  
the	  “characters”	  to	  act	  out	  and	  embrace	  different	  sexual	  and	  gender	  roles.	  It	  is	  worth	  
noting	  that,	  even	  though	  these	  performances	  are	  happening	  linguistically,	  
everything	  happening	  on	  the	  page	  is	  in	  Bloom’s	  mind.	  These	  hallucinations	  exist	  to	  
show	  us	  a	  part	  of	  his	  psyche	  that	  has	  been	  repressed,	  his	  desire	  to	  exist	  in	  the	  
feminine	  space	  he	  is	  denied	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  Joyce	  begins	  to	  experiment	  with	  
physical	  and	  mental	  gender	  as	  he	  transforms	  Leopold	  and	  Bella.	  	  
	  

Bloom’s	  physical	  gender	  changes	  within	  this	  episode	  when	  he	  hallucinates	  

about	  Bella,	  a	  Madame.	  Along	  with	  this	  very	  physical	  transformation,	  Joyce	  
accentuates	  a	  change	  in	  the	  social	  roles	  that	  come	  along	  with	  being	  either	  male	  or	  
female.	  In	  the	  beginning	  of	  this	  scene	  a	  character	  only	  known	  as	  “The	  Fan”	  states,	  
“…the	  missus	  is	  master.	  Petticoat	  government”	  (430),	  proclaiming	  the	  overarching	  
theme	  of	  Bloom’s	  hallucination,	  the	  power	  of	  a	  woman.	  Bloom	  soon	  after	  says,	  
“Exuberant	  female.	  Enormously	  I	  desiderate	  your	  domination.	  I	  am	  exhausted,	  
abandoned,	  no	  more	  young.”	  Before	  any	  changes	  in	  gender	  take	  place,	  there	  is	  a	  very	  
real	  moment	  where	  we	  see	  the	  underlying	  desires	  that	  drive	  Bloom’s	  fantasy.	  This	  
fantasy	  entails	  a	  movement	  of	  power	  from	  male	  to	  female.	  He	  longs	  for	  domination.	  
His	  inability	  to	  fully	  embrace	  his	  masculinity	  has	  left	  him	  drained	  and	  cuckolded.	  	  
	  

While	  exploring	  the	  fluidity	  of	  gender	  by	  transforming	  his	  characters	  

psychologically	  and	  physically,	  Joyce	  also	  stresses	  the	  extremes	  of	  gender,	  the	  

	  

	  
	  

27	  

“manly	  man”	  and	  “womanly	  woman”.	  The	  scene	  between	  Bello	  and	  Bloom	  acts	  as	  an	  
intersection	  of	  these	  two	  gender	  extremes.	  Bello	  takes	  on	  the	  hyper-­‐masculine	  tone	  
while	  verbally	  and	  physically	  abusing	  the	  now	  “womanly	  woman”	  that	  is	  Leopold	  
Bloom.	  Joyce	  accentuates	  the	  role	  of	  “man”	  as	  a	  dominating,	  possessive	  presence,	  
while	  the	  “woman”	  is	  objectified	  and	  emotionally	  battered.	  Joyce	  writes,	  	  
Bello:	  (with	  a	  hard	  basilisk	  stare,	  in	  a	  baritone	  voice)	  
Hound	  of	  dishonor!	  	  
Bloom:	  (infatuated)	  Empress!	  
Bello:	  (his	  heavy	  cheekchops	  sagging)	  Adorer	  of	  the	  
adulterous	  rump...	  Down!	  (He	  taps	  her	  on	  the	  shoulder	  
with	  his	  fan)	  Incline	  feet	  forward!	  Slide	  left	  foot	  on	  pace	  
back!	  You	  will	  fall.	  You	  are	  falling.	  On	  the	  hands	  down!	  	  
Bloom:	  (her	  eyes	  upturned	  in	  the	  sign	  of	  admiration,	  
closing,	  yaps)…	  
Bello:	  (…his	  hands	  stuck	  deep	  in	  his	  breeches	  pockets,	  
places	  his	  heel	  on	  her	  neck	  and	  grinds	  it	  in)	  Footstool!	  
Feel	  my	  entire	  weight.	  Bow	  bondslave,	  before	  the	  
throne	  of	  your	  despot’s	  glorious	  heels	  so	  glistening	  in	  
their	  proud	  erectness.	  (432-­‐433)	  
	  
This	  exchange	  shows	  the	  first	  instance	  of	  physical	  gender	  transformation.	  Bella	  
transforms	  into	  the	  domineering	  and	  aggressive	  Bello.	  Leopold	  Bloom	  not	  only	  
turns	  into	  a	  “her,”	  but	  also	  is	  put	  on	  all	  forms	  and	  transformed	  into	  a	  pig.	  The	  
immediate	  characterization	  of	  these	  two	  new	  characters	  reiterates	  the	  previously	  
mentioned	  gender	  extremes.	  Bello	  is	  immediately	  cast	  with	  a	  “basilisk	  stare,”	  he	  
takes	  on	  the	  ability	  to	  kill	  in	  a	  glance	  the	  already	  weakened	  Bloom,	  who	  is	  described	  
as	  nothing	  but	  “infatuated”	  and	  “admiring.”	  Bello	  hostilely	  commands	  Bloom	  to	  get	  
on	  all	  fours,	  turning	  him	  into	  a	  pig,	  a	  piece	  of	  meat	  and	  her	  property.	  Bloom’s	  role	  as	  
a	  “womanly	  woman”	  is	  one	  that	  stresses	  the	  submissive	  nature	  of	  the	  female	  and	  
her	  societal	  place	  below	  the	  “manly	  man”.	  The	  last	  image	  seen	  in	  this	  passage	  is	  
Bello	  emphasizing	  his	  “heels	  so	  glistening	  in	  their	  proud	  erectness”,	  an	  image	  that	  
	  

	  
	  

28	  

suggests	  his	  domineering	  male	  presence.	  One	  critic	  states,	  “the	  fact	  that	  Bloom-­‐as-­‐
woman	  manifests	  all	  the	  negative	  connotations	  of	  the	  female	  role	  also	  works	  to	  
accentuate	  the	  unnaturalness	  of	  the	  feminine	  stereotype”	  (Joseph	  Boon,	  77).	  This	  
assertion	  further	  complicates	  the	  changing	  gender	  identities	  that	  occur	  throughout	  
the	  episode.	  As	  Boon	  claims,	  the	  ridiculousness	  of	  female	  stereotypes	  becomes	  
apparent	  in	  this	  scene,	  not	  only	  in	  the	  way	  Bello	  speaks	  to	  Bloom	  but	  also	  the	  way	  in	  
which	  Bloom	  submits	  to	  Bello.	  Joyce	  has	  created	  a	  space	  where	  gendered	  extremes	  
are	  shown	  for	  their	  ludicrous	  nature.	  The	  brothel	  has	  become	  a	  place	  for	  expression	  
and	  a	  change	  to	  these	  highly	  pigeonholed	  gender	  expectations.	  	  
	  

The	  issues	  this	  transformation	  brings	  up	  about	  gender	  are	  numerous.	  

Leopold	  Bloom,	  as	  metamorphosed	  woman,	  has	  lost	  all	  power	  over	  himself.	  He’s	  
become	  imprisoned	  in	  this	  female	  body;	  a	  body	  that	  is	  no	  longer	  his	  own	  but	  
belongs	  to	  Bello.	  This	  emotional	  imprisonment	  is	  then	  reiterated	  in	  a	  more	  physical	  
restraint,	  Bello	  declares	  to	  Bloom,	  	  
…You	  will	  be	  laced	  with	  cruel	  force	  into	  vicelike	  corsets	  
of	  soft	  dove	  coutille	  with	  whalebone	  busk	  to	  the	  
diamondtrimmed	  pelvis,	  the	  absolute	  outside	  edge,	  
while	  your	  figure,	  plumper	  than	  when	  at	  large,	  will	  be	  
restrained	  in	  nettight	  frocks,	  pretty	  two	  ounce	  
petticoats	  and	  fringes	  and	  things	  stamped,	  of	  course,	  
with	  my	  houseflag…	  (437)	  
	  
In	  this	  speech	  we	  see	  not	  only	  the	  emotional	  power	  the	  “manly	  man”	  holds	  over	  a	  
woman	  but	  also	  the	  specifically	  constraining	  nature	  of	  gendered	  clothing.	  A	  woman	  
is	  expected	  to	  be	  controlled	  by	  her	  husband	  as	  well	  as	  controlled	  by	  the	  clothing	  she	  
wears.	  	  These	  clothes	  are	  also	  created	  and	  adhere	  to	  the	  androcentric	  ideas	  of	  how	  
women	  should	  look.	  Rado	  expands	  upon	  this	  idea	  when	  she	  claims,	  	  

	  

	  
	  

29	  
…the	  description	  of	  women’s	  clothing	  illustrates	  the	  
degree	  to	  which	  even	  women’s	  bodies	  have	  been	  
reshaped,	  commodified,	  and	  exposed	  for	  what	  society	  
accepts	  as	  a	  ‘normative’	  male	  gaze.	  (Rado,	  9)	  	  

	  
Rado’s	  ideas	  here	  represent	  a	  very	  troubling	  aspect	  of	  societal	  expectations	  for	  
women	  and	  their	  bodies.	  These	  images	  and	  interpretations	  all	  reflect	  a	  female	  
attitude	  towards	  confinement.	  This	  otherwise	  mundane	  description	  of	  female	  attire	  
is	  littered	  with	  violent	  overtures;	  “cruel	  force”	  and	  “vicelike	  corsets”	  restate	  the	  
demanding	  nature	  of	  society’s	  expectations	  for	  women.	  A	  woman’s	  body	  becomes	  
one	  more	  thing	  to	  be	  bought	  and	  sold	  by	  male	  oppressors.	  This	  is	  a	  notion	  that	  
becomes	  important	  later	  on	  when	  exploring	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  relationship	  to	  her	  own	  
“womanhood,”	  and	  her	  aversion	  to	  being	  “chained	  up”	  by	  biologically	  male	  
oppressors.	  	  
	  Joyce	  continues	  to	  explore	  this	  correlation	  between	  a	  woman’s	  passivity	  and	  
a	  man’s	  tendency	  toward	  violence,	  	  
Bello:	  …Swell	  the	  bust.	  Smile.	  Droop	  shoulders.	  What	  
offers?	  (he	  points)	  For	  that	  lot.	  Trained	  by	  owner	  to	  
fetch	  and	  carry,	  basket	  in	  mouth.	  (He	  bares	  his	  arm	  and	  
plunges	  it	  elbowdeep	  in	  Bloom’s	  vulva)	  There’s	  fine	  
depth	  for	  you!	  What	  boys?	  That	  give	  you	  a	  hardon?	  
(440)	  
	  
This	  last	  passage	  revolves	  around	  a	  hallucination	  where	  Bello	  is	  auctioning	  off	  the	  
female	  Bloom,	  who	  becomes	  not	  only	  a	  physical	  piece	  of	  meat	  but	  also	  just	  a	  piece	  of	  
property.	  The	  feminine	  Bloom	  is	  expected	  to	  perform	  the	  “womanly	  woman”,	  
accentuating	  his	  breasts,	  appearing	  pleased,	  and	  performing	  “trained”	  feminine	  
duties.	  However,	  while	  these	  aspects	  show	  the	  expectations	  of	  a	  woman	  to	  perform	  
her	  “feminine	  duties”,	  a	  more	  disturbing	  part	  is	  the	  violent	  action	  Bello	  takes	  against	  

	  

	  
	  

30	  

Bloom.	  The	  moment	  where	  Joyce	  writes,	  “he	  bares	  his	  arm	  and	  plunges	  it	  
elbowdeep	  in	  Bloom’s	  vulva,”	  is	  a	  moment	  of	  extreme	  sexual	  violence.	  It	  signifies	  a	  
complete	  submission	  to	  the	  male	  audience;	  Bloom’s	  female	  body	  belongs	  to	  Bello,	  
who,	  as	  the	  authoritarian	  man	  feels	  entitled	  to	  sadistically	  penetrate	  her.	  	  
	  

The	  interactions	  between	  Bello	  and	  Leopold	  Bloom	  complicate	  this	  idea	  of	  

gender	  roles	  that	  play	  a	  pivotal	  part	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  As	  Joyce	  obscures	  the	  
boundaries	  of	  gender	  through	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom,	  he	  takes	  the	  opportunity	  in	  
this	  episode	  to	  explore	  the	  implications	  of	  society’s	  expected	  “manly	  man”	  and	  
“womanly	  woman.”	  By	  allowing	  Bello	  to	  turn	  into	  a	  totalitarian,	  abusive	  male,	  he’s	  
accentuating	  the	  social	  expectation	  of	  what	  it	  means	  to	  be	  “masculine.”	  A	  “man”	  is	  
supposed	  to	  be	  aggressive	  and	  controlling,	  especially	  over	  his	  female	  “property.”	  
Going	  along	  with	  this	  he	  acknowledges	  the	  explicitly	  submissive	  role	  women	  hold,	  
their	  inability	  to	  escape	  the	  confining	  nature	  of	  their	  social	  and	  marital	  status.	  
Leopold	  Bloom’s	  desire	  to	  exist	  in	  a	  separate	  space	  from	  these	  farcical	  extremes	  is	  
highlighted	  through	  this	  hallucination.	  These	  rigid	  gender	  roles	  do	  not	  appeal	  to	  
either	  Leopold	  or	  Molly	  Bloom.	  They	  continue	  to	  exist	  independently,	  acting	  as	  both	  
feminine	  and	  masculine	  people.	  In	  the	  end,	  Leopold	  loves	  Molly	  and	  her	  forceful	  
personality.	  Suzette	  Henke	  reiterates	  this	  idea	  when	  she	  writes,	  	  
Molly	  embodies…that	  figure	  of	  totalizing	  self	  presence	  
for	  which	  he	  [Bloom]	  perpetually	  pines	  –an	  
unobtainable	  object	  of	  romantic	  fulfillment…Molly	  
occupies	  the…	  “Eternal	  feminine”	  that	  physically	  
centers	  male	  libidinal	  fantasy…	  (125)	  
	  
Leopold	  Bloom,	  despite	  his	  constant	  fetishizing	  of	  women	  across	  Dublin,	  truly	  only	  
yearns	  for	  one.	  His	  gender	  reversal	  acts	  as	  a	  way	  for	  him	  to	  briefly	  satisfy	  his	  

	  

	  
	  

31	  

unrequited	  love	  for	  Molly.	  Even	  though	  this	  chapter	  emphasized	  the	  expected	  
subservient	  place	  of	  a	  woman,	  Molly	  remains	  under	  no	  man’s	  control.	  She	  should	  be	  
the	  most	  obtainable	  woman	  in	  Leopold’s	  life	  and	  yet	  she	  subsists	  as	  the	  most	  
elusive.	  Molly	  exists	  throughout	  the	  novel	  in	  the	  domestic	  space	  of	  their	  home,	  from	  
which	  he	  remains	  exiled	  from	  throughout	  the	  day.	  The	  physical	  space	  where	  she	  
exists	  and	  where	  Bloom	  separates	  from	  can	  be	  looked	  at	  as	  the	  only	  “safe”	  place	  for	  
each	  of	  them	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom	  each	  occupy	  a	  
previously	  un-­‐gendered	  space,	  somewhere	  they	  can	  be	  both	  masculine	  and	  feminine	  
without	  being	  trapped	  by	  the	  duality	  of	  “manly	  man”	  or	  “womanly	  woman”.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

32	  

2	  
“Womb	  of	  Sin”:	  How	  the	  Male	  Gaze	  Attempts	  to	  Marginalize	  Molly	  Bloom	  
	  

With	  biological	  sex	  comes	  a	  whole	  host	  of	  gender	  expectations.	  These	  

constitute	  how	  one	  is	  supposed	  to	  feel,	  act,	  and	  successfully	  integrate	  into	  society.	  In	  
his	  essay	  “A	  Little	  Trouble	  about	  Those	  White	  Corpuscles”,	  Garry	  Leonard	  writes,	  “In	  
order	  for	  ‘masculinity’	  to	  be	  culturally	  intelligible	  it	  must	  be	  performed,	  which	  
means	  all	  presentations	  of	  the	  ‘self’,	  coded	  as	  ‘masculine’,	  are	  potentially	  decodable	  
as	  ‘feminine’”	  (7).	  Leonard	  is	  expressing	  how	  gender	  binaries	  are	  beginning	  to	  break	  
down,	  by	  understanding	  that	  presentation	  of	  the	  “self”	  can	  be	  both	  masculine	  and	  
feminine.	  If	  the	  “masculine	  performance”	  is	  challenged,	  it	  reveals	  the	  need	  for	  a	  
feminine	  counter	  performance.	  If	  we	  are	  meant	  to	  understand	  that	  the	  masculine	  
self	  should	  control	  the	  feminine,	  then	  we	  can	  affirm	  that	  any	  assertion	  of	  female	  
sexuality	  or	  power	  is	  an	  act	  of	  rebellion	  against	  this	  accepted	  patriarchal	  authority.	  
Leonard	  reiterates	  Suzette	  Henke’s	  assertion	  that	  “Femininity	  inhabits	  masculinity”,	  
and	  he	  understands	  that	  if	  this	  statement	  is	  true	  then	  so	  is	  its	  inversion.	  	  
	  

There	  remains	  a	  large	  rejection	  of	  this	  idea.	  In	  his	  essay,	  “Joyce’s	  Vagina	  

Dentata:	  Irish	  Nationalism	  and	  the	  Colonial	  Dilemma	  of	  Manhood,”	  Agata	  Szczeszak-­‐
Brewer	  uses	  the	  myth	  of	  vagina	  dentata	  (a	  woman	  who	  has	  teeth	  in	  her	  vagina)	  to	  
emphasize	  man’s	  fear	  of	  castration	  as	  it	  relates	  to	  “the	  fear	  of	  the	  unknown,	  
mysterious,	  hidden	  “territory’	  and	  the	  anxiety	  that	  a	  powerful	  woman	  might	  unman	  
her	  partner…and	  leave	  him	  weak	  and	  impotent”	  (3).	  To	  Brewer,	  this	  is	  boiled	  down	  
to	  female	  sexuality.	  He	  claims	  there	  is	  an	  “unmistakable	  connection	  between	  the	  
feminine	  and	  the	  threat	  of	  loss.”	  This	  fear	  of	  female	  sexuality	  is	  why	  Leopold	  Bloom	  

	  

	  
	  

33	  

spends	  his	  journey	  fighting	  against	  his	  role	  as	  “womanly	  man.”	  He’s	  been	  
conditioned	  to	  fear	  femininity,	  to	  see	  it	  as	  not	  only	  weakness	  but	  also	  as	  a	  threat.	  His	  
constant	  challenge	  to	  assert	  his	  masculinity	  and	  defend	  it	  stems	  from	  this	  inability	  
to	  separate	  his	  masculine	  and	  feminine	  attributes.	  This	  can	  be	  seen	  in	  moments	  such	  
as	  his	  hallucinations	  in	  the	  “Circe”	  episode,	  where	  he’s	  directly	  confronted	  with	  
powerful	  images	  of	  female	  sexuality	  (Bella/Bello).	  Fear	  of	  a	  woman’s	  sexuality	  is	  
also	  the	  reason	  Molly	  is	  ostracized	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  She	  represents	  a	  woman	  
(one	  who	  exists	  outside	  of	  hallucinations)	  who’s	  taken	  control	  of	  her	  own	  sexual	  
pleasure.	  This	  scares	  the	  men	  that	  surround	  her	  because	  this	  kind	  of	  physical	  and	  
emotional	  control	  gives	  her	  back	  the	  power	  that	  society	  has	  denied	  her.	  To	  keep	  her	  
submissive,	  Joyce’s	  male	  characters	  and	  critics	  reading	  Ulysses	  have	  labeled	  her	  
every	  type	  of	  “whore”	  –someone	  deviant,	  that	  must	  be	  controlled	  by	  the	  dominant	  
man.	  	  
	  

Critical	  reception	  of	  Molly	  Bloom	  has	  continued	  to	  change	  throughout	  time.	  

The	  changes	  seen	  in	  literary	  criticism	  are	  derived	  from	  changing	  social	  and	  gender	  
ideals.	  Kathleen	  McCormick	  writes,	  	  
…Reading	  is	  an	  interdiscursive	  act	  that	  occurs	  within	  
changing	  determinations	  that	  affect	  both	  texts	  and	  
readers.	  This	  perspective	  sees	  texts	  not	  as	  transcendent,	  
stable,	  entities	  with	  universal	  signifiers,	  but	  as	  material	  
objects	  that	  are	  both	  produced	  and	  reproduced	  under	  
changing	  historical	  and	  ideological	  conditions	  
(McCormick,	  19).	  	  
	  
This	  is	  an	  important	  division	  to	  make	  when	  attempting	  to	  talk	  about	  gender	  and	  its	  
relation	  to	  James	  Joyce	  and	  Ulysses.	  McCormick	  is	  right	  to	  make	  this	  distinction;	  our	  
beliefs	  about	  gender	  highly	  affect	  our	  reading	  of	  Joyce,	  just	  as	  they	  affected	  critics	  

	  

	  
	  

34	  

writing	  in	  the	  20th	  century.	  The	  lens	  through	  which	  this	  paper	  is	  written	  reflects	  a	  
highly	  liberal	  education	  in	  a	  time	  where	  gender	  no	  longer	  exists	  only	  as	  “male”	  and	  
female”	  but	  subsists	  in	  such	  denominations	  as	  “cisgender”,	  “transgender”,	  
“transsexual”,	  etc.	  This	  background	  allows	  a	  less	  rigid	  definition	  of	  what	  constitutes	  
masculine	  or	  feminine	  performances	  and	  why	  I’ve	  stressed	  that	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  
Bloom	  exist	  as	  both	  “womanly	  man”	  and	  “manly	  woman”.	  Contemporary	  critics	  can	  
celebrate	  Molly	  as	  a	  radical	  female	  character,	  one	  who	  takes	  control	  of	  her	  sexuality	  
and	  therefore	  takes	  back	  the	  power	  that	  men	  denied	  her.	  However,	  this	  trend	  stems	  
mostly	  from	  contemporary	  female	  criticism.	  In	  the	  1930s	  or	  even	  later	  on	  with	  the	  
50s/60s,	  literary	  critics	  chose	  to	  find	  a	  way	  in	  which	  Molly	  could	  be	  absolved	  of	  this	  
sexual	  power.	  This	  choice	  stemmed	  from	  the	  idea	  that	  this	  authority	  she	  had	  was	  
destructive	  and	  threatening	  towards	  traditionally	  patriarchal	  societal	  norms.	  	  
	  

Labeling	  Molly	  Bloom	  a	  “whore”	  acted	  as	  a	  tactical	  decision	  to	  give	  a	  name	  to	  

something	  critics	  couldn’t	  identify,	  and	  therefore	  became	  threatening.	  McCormick	  
explores	  how	  this	  branding	  absolved	  Molly	  of	  her	  sexual	  independence	  and	  allowed	  
dominant	  male	  figures	  to	  retain	  their	  sexual	  authority	  over	  her.	  McCormick	  writes,	  	  
…Exaggerated	  attacks	  on	  the	  evils	  of	  adultery	  typified	  
criticism	  of	  Molly	  during	  this	  [1950s/1960s]	  
period…the	  ‘fact’	  of	  one	  affair	  automatically	  ‘proves’	  
Molly	  to	  be	  a	  whore…Molly’s	  guilt	  is	  proven	  simply	  by	  
what	  people	  think	  of	  her…(McCormick,	  30)	  
	  
Molly’s	  “guilt,”	  if	  one	  believes	  she’s	  guilty	  of	  anything,	  stems	  from	  fact	  that	  she	  is	  
having	  an	  affair	  with	  Blazes	  Boylan.	  All	  of	  these	  ideas	  arise	  from	  the	  belief,	  stated	  
above,	  that	  American	  critics	  in	  the	  postwar	  period	  linked	  “evil	  with	  the	  female	  body”	  
(30).	  The	  inability	  to	  separate	  Molly’s	  gender	  from	  her	  choices	  as	  a	  sexually	  active	  

	  

	  
	  

35	  

agent	  has	  led	  to	  years	  of	  harsh	  criticism.	  Richard	  Pearce,	  a	  contemporary	  male	  
feminist,	  who	  has	  also	  explored	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  sexual	  role	  within	  the	  novel,	  and	  he	  
responds	  to	  these	  ideas	  McCormick	  brings	  up	  and	  claims,	  “…it	  took	  scholars	  half	  a	  
century	  of	  careful	  reading	  to	  discover	  that	  Molly	  was	  not	  promiscuous,	  for	  Boylan	  
was	  her	  first	  adulteress	  lover”	  (Pearce,	  45).	  These	  scholars	  that	  Pearce	  is	  referring	  
to	  are	  victims	  of	  the	  male	  dominated	  assumptions	  that	  surround	  female	  
promiscuity.	  These	  expectations	  about	  Molly	  are	  highlighted	  by	  Joyce’s	  other	  male	  
characters,	  those	  who	  successfully	  represent	  the	  “manly	  men”	  of	  early	  20th	  century	  
Dublin.	  	  
	  

Before	  Joyce	  shows	  us	  the	  woman	  Molly	  Bloom	  actually	  is,	  he	  focuses	  on	  

these	  types	  of	  assumptions	  and	  how	  they	  function	  within	  a	  small	  community.	  He	  
spends	  the	  first	  seventeen	  episodes	  of	  Ulysses	  showing	  his	  reader	  what	  people	  think	  
about	  Molly,	  whether	  it’s	  Leopold	  Bloom	  pining	  after	  the	  young	  woman	  he	  married	  
or	  one	  of	  his	  friends	  gossiping	  about	  her.	  His	  choice	  to	  characterize	  her	  through	  the	  
male	  gaze	  highlights	  society’s	  problems	  when	  addressing	  a	  woman’s	  sexuality.	  The	  
fear	  that	  exists	  within	  Leopold	  Bloom,	  who	  struggles	  with	  his	  own	  femininity	  and	  
the	  animosity	  that	  comes	  from	  his	  peers,	  reflect	  the	  hyper-­‐masculine	  society	  that	  
Molly	  Bloom	  has	  to	  navigate	  in	  1904	  Dublin.	  A	  reader	  of	  Ulysses	  can’t	  help	  but	  be	  
influenced	  by	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  these	  men	  think	  about	  and	  justify	  their	  opinions	  on	  
her	  and	  the	  choices	  they	  assume	  she’s	  making.	  We’ll	  explore	  this	  idea	  by	  looking	  at	  
the	  three	  major	  male	  presences	  that	  contextualize	  Molly	  throughout	  the	  novel,	  
James	  Joyce,	  Leopold	  Bloom,	  and	  the	  miscellaneous	  male	  presence	  (Leopold’s	  
friends).	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

36	  
Before	  there	  was	  Leopold,	  Molly,	  Stephen,	  Gerty,	  or	  any	  other	  of	  the	  

characters	  within	  Ulysses,	  there	  was	  only	  James	  Joyce.	  As	  an	  author,	  his	  influences	  
must	  be	  addressed	  when	  looking	  at	  the	  impacts	  some	  of	  these	  characters	  continue	  
to	  hold	  over	  readers	  and	  critics	  today.	  We	  continue	  to	  explicate	  and	  derive	  meaning	  
from	  his	  writing,	  as	  did	  people	  in	  the	  60s,	  50s,	  30s,	  etc.	  When	  we	  observe	  the	  impact	  
of	  the	  male	  gaze	  on	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  characterization,	  Joyce’s	  role	  cannot	  be	  
overlooked.	  As	  a	  male	  author,	  what	  was	  his	  role	  in	  creating	  (and	  perhaps	  even	  
fetishizing)	  the	  Molly	  Bloom	  we	  continue	  to	  explore?	  Even	  though	  we	  can	  read	  the	  
“Penelope”	  episode	  as	  something	  separated	  from	  the	  overarching	  androcentric	  
narrative	  that	  makes	  up	  the	  first	  seventeen	  episodes	  of	  Ulysses,	  it’s	  more	  important	  
to	  see	  it	  as	  a	  continuation,	  or	  a	  conversation	  with	  those	  seventeen	  episodes.	  Molly	  
Bloom	  is	  the	  final	  voice	  the	  reader	  encounters.	  She	  participates	  in	  the	  narrative	  
Joyce	  has	  constructed	  and	  challenges	  the	  male-­‐controlled	  agenda	  it	  put	  forth.	  	  
	  

In	  her	  essay	  “Joyce’s	  Female	  Voices	  in	  Ulysses,”	  Heather	  Cook	  Callow	  claims	  

that,	  	  
Joyce…uses	  female	  voices…to	  overturn	  the	  consensus	  of	  
male	  Dublin	  opinion…this	  idea	  does	  not	  make	  him	  a	  
feminist	  writer,	  but	  it	  does	  make	  him	  a	  positive	  ally	  in	  
the	  feminist	  aim	  of	  reevaluating	  a	  literary	  canon	  in	  which	  
authoritative	  patriarchal	  voices	  prevail.	  (161)	  
	  
This	  is	  the	  most	  accessible	  explication	  of	  Joyce’s	  authorial	  relationship	  to	  the	  female	  
characters	  in	  Dublin,	  especially	  Molly	  Bloom.	  Even	  though	  it	  might	  be	  a	  stretch	  to	  
call	  him	  a	  feminist,	  a	  woman	  like	  Molly	  wouldn’t	  exist	  coming	  from	  a	  purely	  
misogynistic	  author.	  Her	  complexity	  and	  free-­‐flowing	  thoughts	  about	  life	  and	  sex	  
were	  thought	  of	  as	  “pornographic,”	  causing	  a	  major	  uproar	  when	  Joyce’s	  novel	  was	  

	  

	  
	  

37	  

first	  published,	  and	  later	  when	  it	  became	  a	  focus	  of	  intense	  interest	  within	  the	  
literary	  community.	  However,	  Callow	  makes	  a	  clear	  point	  that	  Joyce	  doesn’t	  
necessarily	  have	  to	  be	  a	  feminist	  to	  be	  a	  “positive	  ally	  in	  the	  feminist	  aim.”	  	  However,	  
this	  opinion	  does	  not	  necessarily	  reflect	  the	  ideals	  of	  all	  female	  critics,	  who	  continue	  
to	  read	  and	  explore	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  role	  in	  Ulysses.	  Diana	  E.	  Henderson	  expresses	  a	  
more	  critical	  viewpoint	  of	  Molly	  in	  her	  essay	  “Joyce’s	  Modernist	  Woman:	  Whose	  
Last	  Word?”	  She	  writes,	  	  
…As	  regards	  the	  placement	  of	  the	  feminine	  voice	  in	  
“Penelope”,	  formal	  and	  linguistic	  evidence	  shows	  
Ulysses	  to	  be	  inscribed	  within	  familiar	  literary	  
conventions	  of	  epic,	  not	  liberating	  but	  instead	  
containing	  and	  objectifying	  the	  feminine	  voice.	  (520)	  
	  
This	  assertion	  comes	  from	  her	  exploration	  of	  Joyce	  as	  a	  patriarchal	  figure	  in	  
literature,	  revealing	  his	  inability	  to	  separate	  “feminine	  voice”	  from	  his	  own	  sexual	  
fantasies.	  She	  bases	  this	  idea	  on	  a	  letter	  Joyce	  wrote	  to	  Frank	  Budgen	  in	  which	  he	  
writes,	  “Penelope	  turns	  like	  the	  huge	  earth	  ball	  slowly	  surely	  and	  evenly	  round…its	  
four	  cardinal	  points	  being	  the	  female	  breasts,	  arse,	  womb	  and	  cunt”	  (520).	  This	  type	  
of	  sexualization	  is	  her	  proof	  that	  despite	  the	  “sophisticated	  manner”	  in	  which	  Molly	  
speaks	  during	  her	  episode,	  Joyce’s	  intentions	  were	  not	  to	  humanize	  her.	  	  
Henderson’s	  argument	  revolves	  around	  the	  presumption	  that	  because	  Joyce’s	  
language	  is	  often	  indicative	  of	  his	  time	  period’s	  patriarchal	  values,	  he	  is	  unable	  to	  
successfully	  “liberate”	  Molly	  through	  her	  female	  voice.	  However,	  despite	  this	  claim	  it	  
doesn’t	  give	  enough	  credit	  to	  the	  complexity	  of	  Molly’s	  thoughts	  and	  musings	  
throughout	  the	  “Penelope”	  chapter.	  She	  too	  closely	  connects	  the	  author	  with	  the	  
character	  on	  the	  page.	  Regardless	  of	  the	  emphasis	  on	  Molly’s	  sexual	  nature,	  Joyce’s	  

	  

	  
	  

38	  

ability	  to	  adopt	  this	  type	  of	  radical	  feminine	  expression	  reveals	  his	  authorial	  role	  as	  
a	  “feminist	  ally”	  (Callow,	  161).	  	  
	  

Joyce’s	  relationship	  to	  Molly	  Bloom	  reflects	  his	  real	  life	  relationship	  with	  his	  

wife,	  Nora	  Barnacle.	  When	  looking	  at	  the	  way	  he	  portrays	  the	  feminine	  voice,	  it’s	  
imperative	  to	  understand	  how	  this	  relates	  to	  the	  woman	  with	  which	  he	  spent	  most	  
of	  his	  life.	  In	  his	  biography	  James	  Joyce,	  Richard	  Ellmann	  writes,	  	  
Joyce	  attributes	  to	  his	  heroine	  the	  character	  of	  woman,	  
as	  Nora	  had	  shown	  it	  to	  him,	  not	  the	  character,	  so	  often	  
presumed	  by	  novelists,	  of	  an	  irresponsible,	  passionate,	  
romantic	  creature.	  (387-­‐388)	  	  	  
	  
This	  relationship	  is	  the	  reason	  why	  opinions	  such	  as	  Diana	  Henderson’s	  seem	  too	  
harsh	  when	  looking	  at	  how	  Joyce	  chose	  to	  portray	  his	  primary	  female	  character.	  
Joyce’s	  relationship	  to	  Nora	  was	  an	  important	  part	  of	  his	  life,	  especially	  when	  it	  
came	  to	  exploring	  the	  depths	  of	  Molly	  Bloom.	  Nora	  was	  well	  known	  for	  being	  
uninterested	  in	  Joyce’s	  difficult	  prose,	  and	  for	  allegedly	  having	  never	  read	  Ulysses.	  
This	  relates	  to	  Molly’s	  own	  distaste	  for	  intellectuals,	  as	  can	  be	  seen	  in	  “Calypso”	  
when	  she	  proclaims,	  “O	  Rocks!	  …Tell	  us	  in	  plain	  words”	  (Joyce,	  52).	  Joyce	  clearly	  
shares	  the	  same	  respect	  for	  Nora	  that	  Bloom	  later	  expresses	  for	  Molly	  in	  the	  novel.	  
In	  an	  early	  letter	  Joyce	  wrote	  to	  Nora	  he	  writes,	  “Certain	  people	  who	  know	  that	  we	  
are	  much	  together	  often	  insult	  me	  about	  you.	  I	  listen	  to	  them	  calmly,	  disdaining	  to	  
answer	  them	  but	  their	  least	  word	  tumbles	  my	  heart	  about…”	  (Selected	  Letter	  of	  
James	  Joyce,	  27).	  	  It	  seems	  that	  Joyce	  and	  Bloom	  shared	  a	  similar	  problem:	  disdain	  
for	  “friends”	  who	  insult	  their	  partners.	  This	  connection	  between	  life	  and	  fiction	  is	  
one	  reason	  that	  critics	  such	  as	  Callow	  can	  define	  Joyce	  as	  an	  ally	  to	  the	  feminists	  
cause	  without	  having	  to	  label	  him	  a	  feminist	  writer.	  	  
	  

	  
	  
	  

39	  
	  “Penelope”	  should	  not	  be	  taken	  as	  a	  completely	  separate	  piece	  from	  Ulysses.	  

When	  explored	  it	  reveals	  and	  undermines	  many	  of	  the	  ideas	  that	  exist	  previously,	  
allowing	  the	  reader	  to	  question	  the	  male	  narrative	  and	  Joyce’s	  intentions	  when	  
writing	  such	  a	  narrative.	  M.	  Keith	  Booker	  asserts,	  	  
By	  powerfully	  calling	  into	  question	  such	  fundamental	  
traditional	  notions	  as	  the	  very	  nature	  of	  the	  self,	  Joyce’s	  
fiction	  acts	  to	  subvert	  any	  number	  of	  patriarchal	  
assumptions	  upon	  which	  gender	  separations	  have	  been	  
historically	  placed	  (Booker,	  453)	  
	  
This	  is	  why	  Molly’s	  chapter	  becomes	  important	  to	  the	  study	  of	  gender	  as	  it	  relates	  to	  
Ulysses.	  The	  “self”	  that	  Booker	  speaks	  of	  in	  this	  essay	  is	  the	  gendered	  self,	  or	  what	  
society	  has	  expected	  of	  people	  who	  identify	  as	  “male”	  and	  “female.”	  Joyce	  
complicates	  these	  ideas	  throughout	  his	  novel,	  allowing	  characters	  such	  as	  Leopold	  
or	  Molly	  Bloom	  to	  occupy	  both	  masculine	  and	  feminine	  spaces.	  He	  does	  this	  
successfully	  by	  the	  end	  of	  the	  novel,	  where	  it	  becomes	  clear	  that	  the	  patriarchal	  
ideas	  that	  dominate	  the	  first	  seventeen	  episodes	  are	  immediately	  challenged	  when	  
given	  the	  final	  female	  perspective.	  These	  “separations”	  that	  history	  has	  placed	  upon	  
gender	  fall	  away	  and	  allow	  characters	  to	  explore	  the	  spaces	  that	  exist	  between	  what	  
is	  “masculine”	  and	  what	  is	  “feminine”.	  It’s	  why	  Leopold	  spends	  his	  journey	  fighting	  
against	  himself,	  and	  why	  in	  the	  end,	  we	  see	  Molly	  having	  a	  parallel	  identity	  crisis.	  	  
	  

Leopold	  Bloom	  provides	  the	  first,	  and	  one	  of	  the	  most	  important	  opinions	  on	  

Molly	  Bloom	  within	  Ulysses.	  The	  reader	  first	  sees	  them	  in	  their	  home,	  Molly’s	  asleep	  
in	  bed	  while	  Leopold	  sets	  out	  to	  get	  breakfast	  and	  begin	  his	  day	  (“Calypso”,	  Joyce).	  
The	  dynamics	  that	  exist	  within	  this	  marriage	  are	  revealed	  during	  these	  moments;	  
Joyce	  highlights	  the	  isolation	  of	  both	  Molly	  and	  Leopold	  within	  their	  shared	  home.	  

	  

	  
	  

40	  

An	  interesting	  detail	  is	  Molly’s	  existence	  only	  in	  the	  marital	  bed,	  a	  place	  she	  occupies	  
throughout	  the	  novel	  and	  a	  place	  from	  which	  Leopold	  has	  become	  exiled.	  He’s	  been	  
rejected	  from	  this	  sacred	  space,	  a	  place	  where	  he	  once	  (presumably)	  shared	  
intimate	  moments	  with	  Molly,	  a	  place	  that’s	  now	  being	  occupied	  by	  another	  man.	  	  
	  

The	  reader	  is	  first	  introduced	  to	  Molly	  when	  Leopold	  Bloom	  returns	  with	  her	  

breakfast,	  	  
She	  set	  the	  brasses	  jingling	  as	  she	  raised	  herself	  briskly,	  
an	  elbow	  on	  the	  pillow.	  He	  looked	  calmly	  down	  on	  her	  
bulk	  and	  between	  her	  large	  soft	  bubs,	  sloping	  within	  
her	  nightdress	  like	  a	  shegoat’s	  udder.	  The	  warmth	  of	  
her	  couched	  body	  rose	  on	  the	  air,	  mingling	  with	  the	  
fragrances	  of	  the	  tea	  she	  poured.	  (Joyce,	  51-­‐52)	  

	  
From	  the	  moment	  she	  gets	  up,	  her	  body	  is	  “jingling	  the	  brasses,”	  as	  Leopold	  focuses	  
on	  her	  “bulk”	  or	  her	  “large	  soft	  bubs.”	  His	  preoccupation	  with	  her	  as	  an	  objectified	  
body	  becomes	  overtly	  apparent	  in	  this	  brief	  passage.	  It’s	  the	  beginning	  of	  an	  entire	  
relationship	  that	  will	  be	  based	  around	  Leopold’s	  incessant	  desire	  for	  Molly’s	  plump,	  
womanly	  body.	  As	  we	  have	  observed,	  the	  only	  place	  Molly	  is	  ever	  plainly	  seen	  in	  the	  
novel	  is	  in	  this	  bed.	  Whether	  Leopold	  is	  leaving	  in	  the	  morning,	  or	  returning	  at	  night,	  
Joyce	  never	  allows	  the	  reader	  to	  see	  Molly	  unconfined	  from	  this	  space.	  	  
	  

Leopold	  spends	  a	  large	  portion	  of	  his	  time	  thinking	  about	  Molly	  in	  the	  

present	  day	  (an	  adulteress	  in	  bed)	  and	  remembering	  her	  from	  the	  past	  (a	  loving	  
wife).	  The	  disparity	  that	  exists	  between	  these	  two	  women	  as	  they	  occupy	  his	  mind	  
determines	  how	  Leopold’s	  thoughts	  influence	  the	  reader.	  Leopold	  fantasizes	  about	  a	  
time	  when	  Molly	  loved	  him	  and	  they	  were	  happy.	  However,	  when	  one	  begins	  to	  pay	  
attention	  to	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  he	  longs	  for	  her,	  it	  becomes	  clear	  that	  all	  his	  thoughts	  
and	  memories	  are	  not	  focused	  on	  Molly	  as	  a	  partner,	  but	  on	  her	  physical	  body.	  
	  

	  
	  

41	  

Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  one	  who	  “eats	  with	  relish,”	  including	  his	  appetite	  for	  plump	  female	  
figures,	  which	  he	  follows	  and	  fantasizes	  about	  throughout	  the	  day.	  	  Molly	  Bloom	  
exists	  as	  another	  one	  of	  these	  objects,	  something	  he	  wishes	  to	  consume	  to	  satiate	  his	  
exasperated	  appetite.	  Richard	  Pearce	  writes,	  “…desire	  is	  aroused	  by	  what	  we	  do	  not	  
possess,	  or	  what	  is	  other	  and	  therefore	  threatening	  to	  us…we	  control	  this	  threat	  by	  
repressing,	  sublimating,	  or	  transforming	  it	  into	  a	  fetish	  –that	  is	  an	  object…”	  (41-­‐42).	  
Molly	  becomes	  this	  object	  in	  Leopold’s	  mind,	  a	  symbol	  of	  his	  ever-­‐present	  masculine	  
desires	  for	  her.	  What	  might	  be	  interpreted,	  as	  endearing	  moments	  of	  a	  cuckolded	  
husband	  missing	  his	  wife,	  are	  actually	  representative	  of	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  inability	  to	  
separate	  Molly	  from	  a	  sexual	  object.	  	  
	  

A	  counterargument	  to	  this	  point	  would	  be	  that	  Leopold	  does	  in	  fact	  respect	  

Molly	  as	  an	  individual.	  There’s	  a	  brief	  moment	  in	  “Lestrygonians”	  where	  he	  mimics	  
her	  reactionary,	  “O	  Rocks!”	  and	  continues	  on	  thinking,	  	  
Mr.	  Bloom	  smiled	  O	  Rocks	  at	  two	  windows…She’s	  right	  
after	  all.	  Only	  big	  words	  for	  ordinary	  things	  on	  account	  
of	  the	  sound.	  She’s	  not	  exactly	  witty.	  Can	  be	  rude	  too.	  
Blurt	  out	  what	  I	  was	  thinking.	  Still,	  I	  don’t	  know…(Joyce,	  
126).	  	  

	  
The	  “O	  Rocks!”	  he	  mimics	  before	  this	  passage	  parallels	  a	  moment	  in	  “Calypso”	  where	  
Molly	  refuses	  to	  be	  talked	  down	  to	  by	  Leopold	  and	  expresses	  her	  desire	  for	  him	  to	  
speak	  “in	  plain	  words”	  so	  that	  she	  will	  understand	  him.	  In	  this	  moment	  her	  strong-­‐
willed	  exterior	  elicits	  a	  fond	  memory.	  Even	  though	  he	  acknowledges	  that	  she’s	  “not	  
exactly	  witty”	  and	  “can	  be	  rude,”	  he’s	  more	  impressed	  with	  her	  choices	  to	  stand	  up	  
for	  herself	  when	  faced	  with	  affectation.	  His	  attempt	  to	  reconcile	  with	  the	  present-­‐
day	  Molly	  is	  reflected	  in	  this	  brief	  passage.	  Leopold	  spends	  his	  day	  struggling	  to	  

	  

	  
	  

42	  

disassociate	  the	  Molly	  he	  wants	  to	  remember,	  the	  loving,	  adoring	  wife,	  from	  the	  
adulteress	  he	  believes	  she	  has	  become.	  In	  Leopold’s	  mind,	  he’s	  already	  lost	  her;	  
she’s	  become	  the	  unobtainable	  sexual	  partner.	  Referring	  back	  to	  Pearce’s	  idea,	  
Leopold’s	  sexual	  desires	  are	  being	  “aroused”	  by	  what	  “he	  does	  not	  possess,”	  and	  
therefore,	  perhaps	  unintentionally,	  he	  chooses	  to	  objectify	  Molly	  as	  a	  means	  of	  
regaining	  his	  masculine	  authority.	  	  
	  

In	  James	  Joyce	  and	  Sexuality,	  Richard	  Brown	  makes	  an	  important	  observation	  

about	  the	  way	  marriage	  is	  portrayed	  in	  Ulysses.	  He	  claims,	  “love	  is	  presented	  not	  as	  a	  
union	  but	  as	  a	  kind	  of	  separation	  of	  individuals,”	  a	  statement	  he	  proves	  by	  using	  the	  
Blooms	  as	  his	  prime	  examples.	  This	  idea	  of	  isolation	  in	  marriage	  is	  important	  when	  
observing	  how	  Leopold	  and	  Molly	  Bloom	  interact	  (or	  don’t)	  within	  the	  entirety	  of	  
Joyce’s	  novel.	  Leopold’s	  fetishizing	  of	  Molly	  stems	  from	  this	  separation.	  As	  husband	  
and	  wife,	  even	  though	  they	  are	  legally	  bound	  to	  each	  other,	  they	  each	  continue	  living	  
their	  own	  sexual	  lives.	  	  	  
	  

At	  the	  end	  of	  Leopold’s	  narrative,	  he	  has	  returned	  to	  this	  place,	  observing	  

Molly	  in	  their	  bed.	  Joyce	  writes,	  	  

	  

	  

…An	  approximate	  erection:	  a	  solicitous	  adversion:	  a	  
gradual	  elevation:	  a	  tentative	  revelation:	  a	  silent	  
contemplation…	  
	  
…He	  kissed	  the	  plump	  mellow	  yellow	  smellow	  melons	  
of	  her	  rump,	  on	  each	  plump	  melonous	  hemisphere,	  in	  
their	  mellow	  yellow	  furrow,	  with	  obscure	  prolonged	  
provocative	  melonsmellonous	  osculation…	  
	  
…A	  silent	  contemplation:	  a	  tentative	  velation:	  a	  gradual	  
abasement:	  a	  solicitous	  aversion:	  a	  proximate	  erection.	  	  
(604)	  

	  
	  

43	  

The	  first	  thing	  that’s	  striking	  about	  this	  scene	  is	  how	  Leopold	  changes	  from	  before	  
his	  physical	  interaction	  with	  Molly	  and	  after.	  His	  hesitation	  is	  clear	  as	  he	  approaches	  
Molly;	  her	  physical	  presence	  is	  stressful	  for	  the	  late	  returned	  Leopold.	  This	  anxiety	  
connects	  to	  the	  patriarchal	  fear	  that	  he’s	  experienced	  throughout	  the	  story.	  Being	  
near	  Molly,	  a	  sexually	  open	  female,	  continues	  to	  threaten	  Leopold.	  Everything	  in	  this	  
first	  section	  gives	  the	  impression	  that	  Leopold	  is	  not	  quite	  committing	  to	  whether	  or	  
not	  he	  should	  act	  on	  his	  physical	  desires.	  The	  use	  of	  words	  like	  “approximate,”	  
“gradual,”	  and	  “tentative,”	  give	  the	  reader	  a	  sense	  of	  Leopold’s	  wavering	  confidence	  
in	  the	  company	  of	  his	  willful	  spouse.	  After	  this	  physical	  interaction	  (the	  only	  
physical	  moment	  we	  see	  between	  them	  that	  exists	  outside	  their	  respective	  
memories),	  Leopold’s	  uncertainties	  seem	  to	  have	  been	  validated.	  When	  Bloom’s	  
thoughts	  begin	  to	  evolve,	  the	  tone	  begins	  to	  change.	  Joyce	  uses	  words	  like	  
“abasement,”	  “solicitous	  aversion,”	  and	  “proximate	  erection”	  to	  convey	  a	  dissatisfied	  
and	  emasculated	  Bloom.	  These	  feelings	  constitute	  his	  perception	  of	  Molly,	  and	  his	  
inability	  to	  perceive	  her	  as	  a	  “person.”	  His	  choice	  to	  repress	  Molly	  derives	  from	  his	  
unrequited	  desire	  for	  her.	  	  
	  

This	  unreciprocated	  sexual	  desire	  is	  highlighted	  through	  the	  brief	  physical	  

moment	  they	  “share”	  upon	  his	  return	  to	  the	  marital	  bed.	  Bloom’s	  choice	  to	  kiss	  her	  
rear	  is	  impersonal.	  Instead	  of	  acknowledging	  her	  face,	  he	  focuses	  on	  her	  body	  from	  
behind,	  showing	  how	  distant	  they	  are	  intimately,	  even	  while	  occupying	  the	  same	  
bed.	  	  Leopold’s	  focus	  lies	  upon	  her	  backside,	  her	  “plump	  melons,”	  which	  he	  proceeds	  
to	  “osculate”	  in	  an	  “obscure	  prolonged	  provocative”	  way.	  Everything	  about	  this	  
passage	  reflects	  his	  inability	  to	  connect	  with	  Molly	  as	  a	  person.	  Joyce’s	  choice	  to	  

	  

	  
	  

44	  

focus	  Leopold’s	  attention	  to	  these	  details,	  his	  body	  in	  relation	  to	  hers,	  reflects	  the	  
deeply	  rooted	  isolation	  that	  exists	  between	  man	  and	  wife.	  	  
	  

Leopold’s	  physical	  relationship	  with	  Molly,	  as	  it	  exists	  in	  this	  brief	  scene,	  is	  in	  

juxtaposition	  with	  his	  portrayal	  of	  her	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  Before	  this	  brief	  
encounter,	  the	  only	  place	  where	  he	  and	  Molly	  have	  any	  intimate	  relations	  is	  in	  his	  
memory.	  When	  he	  thinks	  about	  their	  past	  together	  it	  often	  reflects	  a	  happier,	  less	  
embittered	  self	  	  
Pillowed	  on	  my	  coat	  she	  had	  her	  hair,	  earwigs	  in	  the	  
heather	  scrub	  my	  hand	  under	  her	  nape…Ravished	  over	  
her	  I	  lay,	  full	  lips	  full	  open,	  kissed	  her	  mouth.	  Yum.	  
Softly	  she	  gave	  me	  in	  my	  mouth	  the	  seedcake	  warm	  and	  
chewed…Young	  life…Flowers	  her	  eyes	  were,	  take	  me,	  
willing	  eyes.	  (144)	  

	  
The	  relationship	  Leopold	  exposes	  here	  is	  not	  the	  relationship	  seen	  in	  the	  previous	  
passage.	  Their	  physical	  closeness	  juxtaposes	  the	  distance	  seen	  at	  the	  end	  of	  “Ithaca.”	  
Instead	  of	  Leopold	  returning	  and	  only	  interacting	  with	  her	  backside,	  there’s	  a	  face-­‐
to-­‐face	  connection	  between	  them	  here,	  her	  head	  on	  his	  lap,	  sharing	  impassioned	  
kisses.	  Even	  the	  brief	  sharing	  of	  the	  seedcake	  emphasizes	  the	  closeness	  they	  once	  
shared.	  However	  romantic	  this	  appears	  in	  Leopold’s	  memory	  and	  for	  the	  reader,	  the	  
obvious	  patriarchal	  overtones	  cannot	  be	  overlooked.	  He	  highlights	  his	  previous	  
“masculine”	  power	  over	  her	  when	  he	  thinks,	  “Ravished	  over	  her	  I	  lay;”	  while	  she’s	  
tangibly	  beneath	  him	  with	  her	  “take	  me,	  willing	  eyes.”	  The	  fact	  that	  Leopold	  yearns	  
for	  this	  type	  of	  physical	  submission	  focuses	  the	  attention	  back	  to	  his	  struggle	  to	  
assert	  his	  dominance.	  Molly’s	  choice	  to	  exist	  freely	  from	  Leopold	  and	  take	  control	  of	  
her	  sex	  life	  threatens	  his	  position	  as	  the	  masculine	  authority.	  Throughout	  the	  novel,	  

	  

	  
	  

45	  

he	  chooses	  to	  remember	  moments	  where	  she	  was	  sexually	  compliant,	  allowing	  him	  
to	  regain	  a	  semblance	  of	  masculine	  authority.	  	  	  	  
	  

In	  Heather	  Cook	  Callow’s	  essay	  “Joyce’s	  Female	  Voices	  in	  Ulysses,”	  she	  

observes	  how	  Joyce’s	  construction	  of	  the	  novel,	  predominately	  it’s	  androcentric	  
narrative,	  reflects	  certain	  opinions	  of	  principal	  characters	  that	  are	  often	  debunked	  
when	  given	  a	  closer	  reading.	  She	  focuses	  on	  the	  masculine	  presence	  surrounding	  
Leopold	  Bloom	  as	  he	  wanders	  around	  Dublin,	  and	  how	  his	  “friends’”	  often-­‐biased	  
opinions	  shape	  the	  reader’s	  own	  sentiments	  towards	  Leopold.	  This	  same	  argument	  
can	  be	  applied	  to	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  Molly	  Bloom	  is	  portrayed	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  
Until	  her	  own	  voice	  is	  heard	  in	  “Penelope,”	  she’s	  characterized	  through	  the	  musings	  
and	  conversations	  of	  Dublin’s	  masculine	  community.	  
	  

We’ve	  already	  observed	  how	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  relationship	  to	  Molly	  focuses	  

around	  her	  as	  a	  sexual	  object.	  It’s	  also	  been	  established	  that	  despite	  this	  intimate	  
detachment	  he	  recognizes	  her	  affinity	  for	  sharp	  retorts.	  Before	  Joyce	  illuminates	  this	  
side	  of	  Molly,	  he	  keeps	  his	  focus	  on	  her	  as	  an	  object	  via	  his	  male	  characters.	  Similar	  
to	  Callow’s	  interpretations	  of	  Leopold	  Bloom’s	  relationship	  to	  his	  male	  friends,	  
Molly’s	  characterization	  is	  also	  framed	  by	  the	  androcentric	  focus	  of	  the	  first	  
seventeen	  episodes.	  We	  are	  given	  less	  information	  about	  Molly	  through	  both	  
Leopold	  and	  what	  can	  only	  be	  likened	  to	  the	  “gossip”	  that	  his	  friends	  share.	  
Whenever	  Molly	  becomes	  the	  focus	  of	  male	  conversation,	  it’s	  often	  focused	  on	  their	  
disdain	  for	  her	  actions	  or	  their	  vulgar	  insinuations.	  	  

	  

	  
	  

46	  

	  

It’s	  understandable	  why,	  for	  years,	  critics	  believed	  Molly	  Bloom	  had	  a	  history	  

of	  promiscuous	  behavior.	  Any	  time	  Leopold	  Bloom	  is	  confronted	  by	  his	  masculine	  
friends,	  she	  becomes	  a	  topic	  of	  discussion.	  Just	  like	  Leopold,	  the	  readers	  are	  
accosted	  with	  these	  single-­‐minded	  ideas.	  In	  a	  brief	  moment	  with	  the	  citizen,	  one	  of	  
these	  characteristically	  “manly	  men”	  from	  later	  in	  the	  novel,	  Joyce	  writes,
And	  Bloom	  letting	  on	  to	  be	  awfully	  deeply	  
interested	  in	  nothing,	  a	  spider’s	  web	  in	  the	  
corner	  behind	  the	  barrel,	  and	  the	  citizen	  
scowling	  after	  him...when…‘A	  dishonoured	  wife’,	  
says	  the	  citizen,	  ‘that’s	  what’s	  the	  cause	  of	  all	  our	  
misfortunes’.	  (266)
This	  moment	  provides	  a	  brief	  insight	  to	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  Leopold	  Bloom	  framed	  
through	  the	  misconceptions	  about	  Molly’s	  sex	  life.	  Due	  to	  Leopold’s	  disinterest	  in	  
the	  citizen’s	  opinions,	  to	  gain	  back	  authority	  in	  the	  situation,	  he	  confronts	  Leopold	  
with	  the	  one	  aspect	  of	  his	  life	  he	  should	  have	  total	  control	  over,	  his	  wife.	  He	  exploits	  
Leopold	  and	  Molly’s	  situation	  by	  insinuating	  that	  she	  has	  become	  the	  “cause	  of	  all	  
[his]	  misfortunes.”	  By	  attacking	  Molly’s	  infidelity,	  the	  citizen	  succeeds	  in	  
accentuating	  Leopold’s	  own	  struggle,	  navigating	  a	  world	  in	  which	  his	  masculinity	  
has	  been	  compromised	  while	  also	  highlighting	  the	  popular	  opinion	  the	  men	  of	  
Ulysses	  share	  about	  Molly.	  
	  

This	  complete	  disregard	  for	  Leopold’s	  role	  as	  husband	  is	  a	  constant	  topic	  of	  

conversation	  amongst	  his	  Irish	  peers.	  Prior	  to	  the	  scene	  explored	  above,	  we	  see	  
Leopold	  Bloom	  speaking	  with	  these	  same	  men,	  who	  bring	  up	  Blazes	  Boylan	  and	  his	  
role	  in	  Molly’s	  upcoming	  concert.	  It’s	  unclear	  how	  intentional	  this	  is	  until	  Joyce	  
writes,	  

	  

	  
	  

47	  
Pride	  of	  Calpe’s	  rocky	  mount,	  the	  ravenhaired	  
daughter	  of	  Tweedy.	  There	  grew	  she	  to	  peerless	  
beauty	  where	  loquat	  and	  almond	  scent	  the	  air.	  
The	  gardens	  of	  Alameda	  knew	  her	  step:	  the	  
garths	  of	  olives	  knew	  and	  bowed.	  The	  chaste	  
spouse	  of	  Leopold	  she	  is.	  Marion	  of	  the	  bountiful	  
bosoms.	  (262)

This	  brief	  passage	  from	  “Cyclops”	  shows	  another	  side	  to	  male	  Dublin’s	  view	  of	  Molly	  
Bloom.	  In	  it	  she’s	  absolved	  of	  any	  agency	  she	  might	  have	  over	  herself	  while	  also	  
pushed	  further	  into	  the	  realm	  of	  “other.”	  By	  asserting	  her	  relationship	  to	  Spain,	  
they’re	  asserting	  her	  as	  a	  foreigner,	  much	  as	  Leopold’s	  Jewishness	  sets	  him	  apart.	  
She’s	  also	  continually	  described	  as	  belonging	  to	  someone,	  whether	  it’s	  the	  “Calpe’s	  
rocky	  mount,”	  “Tweedy,”	  or	  even	  “Leopold.”	  The	  correlation	  between	  how	  these	  
men	  choose	  to	  view	  Molly	  and	  how	  Leopold	  views	  her	  is	  clear.	  Leopold	  chooses	  to	  
assert	  his	  masculinity	  by	  objectifying	  Molly,	  something	  that	  comes	  easily	  to	  the	  
other	  men	  he	  encounters	  throughout	  the	  day.	  Joyce	  also	  stresses	  Molly’s	  role	  as	  an	  
exotic	  beauty,	  something	  easily	  fetishized.	  She’s	  the	  “Pride	  of	  Calpe,”	  a	  “ravenhaired	  
beauty,”	  and	  a	  woman	  whose	  body	  literally	  affects	  the	  nature	  that	  surrounds	  her.	  
This	  description	  paints	  a	  picture	  of	  a	  dark,	  mysterious,	  possibly	  exotic	  
woman.	  	  However	  striking	  she	  remains	  to	  be	  in	  the	  eyes	  of	  these	  men,	  her	  defining	  
characteristic	  is	  highlighted	  by	  the	  last	  two	  sentences,	  “The	  chaste	  spouse	  of	  
Leopold…Marion	  of	  the	  bountiful	  bosoms.”	  This	  ending	  continues	  to	  define	  her	  by	  
her	  husband	  and	  her	  body,	  the	  two	  pieces	  of	  her	  that	  matter	  to	  the	  androcentric	  
community	  Joyce	  accentuates	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  	  By	  referring	  to	  her	  as	  the	  
“chaste	  spouse,”	  Joyce	  is	  not	  only	  attacking	  Leopold,	  but	  because	  of	  the	  mocking	  
connotations,	  he	  is	  leading	  the	  reader	  to	  question	  her	  alleged	  “chastity.”	  This	  can	  be	  

	  

	  
	  

48	  

deduced	  from	  the	  final	  line,	  acknowledging	  her	  “bountiful	  bosoms,”	  suggesting	  her	  
body	  has	  been	  enjoyed	  copiously	  and	  reinforcing	  Molly’s	  role	  as	  sexual	  object.	  	  	  
	  

Oftentimes	  the	  blatant	  sexualization	  of	  Molly	  occurs	  in	  passing,	  as	  something	  

that	  can	  be	  assumed	  through	  male	  dominated	  Dublin.	  Whether	  these	  men	  are	  
chatting	  on	  the	  streets	  or	  at	  the	  pub,	  Molly	  Bloom	  seems	  to	  find	  her	  way	  into	  their	  
conversations,	  conveniently	  when	  Leopold	  joins	  the	  group.	  In	  a	  passing	  moment	  
Simon	  Dedalus	  claims,	  “Mrs.	  Marion	  Bloom	  has	  left	  off	  clothes	  of	  all	  descriptions”	  
(221).	  This	  isn’t	  the	  first	  time	  these	  men	  have	  implied	  something	  sexual	  about	  her,	  
thinking	  back	  on	  her	  “bountiful	  bosoms.”	  It’s	  safe	  to	  assume	  Dedalus	  is	  making	  a	  
double	  entendre.	  	  This	  snide	  remark	  reveals	  a	  darker	  side	  to	  the	  men	  Leopold	  has	  
chosen	  to	  surround	  himself	  with,	  these	  “friends”	  of	  his.	  Their	  incessant	  need	  to	  
degrade	  Molly’s	  character	  exposes	  the	  fear	  of	  female	  sexuality	  and	  how	  it	  threatens	  
their	  own	  patriarchal	  power.	  To	  slander	  her	  is	  to	  rob	  her	  of	  this	  power.	  
	  

This	  type	  of	  sexual	  defamation	  is	  expected.	  Simon	  Dedalus	  suggests	  Molly	  has	  

some	  history	  of	  sexual	  deviancy;	  however,	  he	  remains	  rather	  detached.	  There’s	  a	  
moment	  that	  occurs	  earlier	  in	  the	  novel,	  where	  we	  see	  Lenehan,	  another	  man	  from	  
this	  “friend”	  group,	  boast	  about	  an	  interaction	  he	  had	  with	  Molly.	  He	  claims,	  
…When	  we	  sallied	  forth	  it	  was	  blue	  o’clock	  the	  
morning	  after	  the	  night	  before.	  Coming	  home	  it	  
was	  a	  gorgeous	  winter’s	  night	  on	  the	  Featherbed	  
Mountain.	  Bloom	  and	  Chris	  Callinan	  were	  on	  one	  
side	  of	  the	  car	  and	  I	  was	  with	  the	  wife	  on	  the	  
other…She	  was	  well	  primed	  with	  a	  good	  load	  of	  
Delahunt’s	  port	  under	  her…Every	  jolt	  the	  bloody	  
car	  gave	  I	  had	  her	  bumping	  up	  against	  me.	  Hell’s	  

	  

	  
	  

49	  
delights!	  She	  has	  a	  fine	  pair,	  God	  bless	  her…	  
(192-­‐193)

Lenehan	  delivers	  the	  most	  explicit	  example	  of	  the	  Dublin	  male’s	  disregard	  for	  Molly	  
as	  a	  person.	  If	  you	  read	  past	  all	  the	  erotic	  overtones,	  Lenehan	  and	  Molly	  were	  simply	  
seated	  side	  by	  side	  in	  a	  taxi	  or	  carriage,	  and	  experienced	  some	  slight	  turbulence,	  
which	  provided	  him	  with	  what	  seems	  like	  a	  lifetimes	  worth	  of	  stories.	  However,	  the	  
way	  in	  which	  he	  chooses	  to	  communicate	  this	  story	  show	  the	  complete	  indifference	  
he	  has	  for	  Molly.	  His	  assumptions	  about	  her	  sexually	  explicit	  life	  apart	  from	  Leopold	  
are	  all	  the	  proof	  he	  needs	  when	  thinking	  back	  on	  this	  occurrence.	  It	  doesn’t	  matter	  
that	  they	  were	  in	  a	  cramped	  car;	  in	  his	  mind	  her	  body	  was	  his	  for	  the	  taking,	  not	  
physically,	  but	  emotionally	  and	  visually.	  At	  this	  moment	  in	  the	  novel,	  we’ve	  only	  
been	  introduced	  to	  Molly	  through	  stories	  such	  as	  these,	  or	  Leopold’s	  memories.	  We	  
know	  she’s	  having	  an	  affair,	  but	  there	  is	  no	  evidence	  as	  to	  whether	  or	  not	  it’s	  her	  
first.	  Through	  the	  eyes	  of	  Leopold	  and	  his	  “friends,”	  Joyce	  chooses	  to	  lead	  the	  reader	  
to	  believe	  that	  this	  may	  not	  be	  Molly’s	  first	  affair.	  Treating	  her	  like	  a	  sexual	  object	  
allows	  these	  men	  to	  undermine	  and	  control	  her,	  because	  the	  idea	  of	  an	  assertively	  
sexual	  woman	  is	  not	  appealing.	  
The	  masculine	  presence	  in	  Dublin,	  the	  one	  that	  exists	  apart	  from	  the	  sexually	  
ambiguous	  world	  of	  the	  Blooms,	  is	  a	  world	  that	  gains	  its	  authority	  from	  what	  are	  
popularly	  known	  as	  “gender	  norms.”	  These	  “norms”	  are	  the	  stereotypical	  “man”	  or	  
“woman,”	  the	  person	  who’s	  internalized	  the	  societal	  gender	  roles	  they’re	  expected	  
to	  perform.	  What	  these	  types	  of	  performances	  construct	  have	  been	  explored	  
through	  Leopold,	  and	  will	  be	  explored	  in	  Molly	  as	  well.	  Outside	  their	  home,	  and	  

	  

	  
	  

50	  

their	  marriage,	  there	  exists	  a	  world	  that	  revolves	  around	  patriarchal	  authority	  
Treating	  Molly	  like	  a	  sexual	  object,	  while	  also	  treating	  Leopold	  as	  a	  social	  pariah	  
shows	  the	  destructive	  nature	  of	  androcentric	  Dublin.	  Molly’s	  controversial	  place	  
amongst	  these	  men	  shows	  the	  changing	  world	  that	  they’re	  fighting	  so	  hard	  to	  resist.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

51	  

3	  
“The	  Missus	  is	  Master”:	  How	  Molly	  Bloom	  Redefines	  her	  Sex	  and	  Gender	  
	  

In	  previous	  chapters	  we’ve	  explored	  the	  implications	  of	  gender	  performance	  

on	  Joyce’s	  male	  and	  female	  characters.	  Leopold	  Bloom	  spends	  his	  entire	  day	  
struggling	  to	  balance	  the	  “womanly	  man”	  that	  exists	  within	  him	  with	  the	  “masculine	  
man”	  Dublin	  expects	  of	  him.	  We’ve	  seen	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  Joyce	  constructs	  
femininity	  (directly	  connected	  with	  Molly)	  through	  Leopold,	  and	  the	  miscellaneous	  
Irishmen	  of	  Ulysses.	  Joyce	  meticulously	  led	  his	  readers	  through	  these	  male	  
narratives,	  suggesting	  along	  the	  way,	  how	  we	  are	  meant	  to	  be	  thinking	  about	  
femininity	  and	  female	  sexuality	  by	  the	  time	  we	  reach	  his	  eighteenth	  episode,	  
“Penelope.”	  	  
	  

Molly	  Bloom	  spends	  the	  entirety	  of	  “Penelope”	  trying	  to	  convey	  her	  

“masculine”	  and	  “feminine”	  traits	  through	  gendered	  performance.	  Kimberly	  Devlin	  
explores	  the	  implications	  of	  Molly’s	  final	  gendered	  performance	  in	  her	  essay	  
“Pretending	  in	  ‘Penelope’:	  Masquerade,	  Mimicry,	  and	  Molly	  Bloom.”	  She	  claims	  that	  
Molly	  is	  “a	  weaver	  and	  unweaver	  of	  identity	  itself,	  [she]	  dons	  multiple	  recognizable	  
masks	  of	  womanliness,	  appropriating	  femininity	  in	  many	  familiar	  figurations”	  (81).	  
A	  few	  concepts	  immediately	  become	  important	  when	  taking	  this	  statement	  into	  
account,	  first,	  that	  even	  though	  Molly	  is	  performing,	  she’s	  performing	  what	  is	  
familiar	  to	  both	  male	  and	  female	  readers	  (“recognizable”).	  Devlin’s	  use	  of	  the	  word	  
“appropriating,”	  suggests	  a	  second	  concept,	  that	  even	  though	  Molly	  is	  a	  female,	  her	  
performance	  of	  that	  gender	  is	  something	  that	  has	  to	  be	  assumed.	  In	  other	  words,	  it’s	  
unnatural.	  Throughout	  her	  monologue	  Molly	  is	  able	  to	  “undermine	  the	  notion	  of	  

	  

	  
	  

52	  

womanliness	  as	  [she]	  displays	  it”	  (Devlin,	  82).	  Joyce,	  via	  Molly,	  recognizes	  the	  
mundaneness	  of	  performing	  the	  “female”	  and	  emphasizes	  that	  gender	  is	  only	  a	  
concept.	  	  
	  

Gender	  is	  a	  social	  construct	  that	  is	  immediately	  bestowed	  upon	  you	  at	  birth.	  

The	  moment	  you	  enter	  the	  world	  you’re	  either	  a	  male	  or	  a	  female.	  This	  isn’t	  gender	  
though,	  it’s	  your	  sex	  and	  once	  given	  a	  sex,	  society	  expects	  you	  to	  uphold	  the	  
performances	  that	  correlate	  (gender).	  This	  becomes	  one	  major	  aspect	  of	  Molly’s	  
monologue,	  her	  defiance	  against	  the	  body	  that	  first	  got	  her	  labeled	  as	  “female.”	  She	  
thinks,	  	  
…Whats	  the	  idea	  making	  us	  like	  that	  with	  a	  big	  hole	  in	  
the	  middle	  of	  us	  or	  like	  a	  Stallion	  driving	  up	  into	  you	  
because	  thats	  all	  they	  want	  out	  of	  you	  with	  that	  
determined	  vicious	  look	  in	  his	  eyes…nice	  invention	  they	  
made	  for	  women	  for	  him	  to	  get	  all	  the	  
pleasure…(“Penelope”,	  611)	  
	  
This	  is	  the	  first	  time	  she	  addresses	  both	  the	  female	  and	  the	  male	  body	  as	  they	  relate	  
to	  each	  other.	  First	  she	  addresses	  the	  female	  body,	  asking	  the	  question,	  why	  are	  we	  
left	  with	  only	  a	  big	  hole	  in	  us?	  –Focusing	  the	  reader	  on	  the	  vulnerability	  that	  a	  
woman	  feels	  about	  her	  sexual	  body.	  This	  is	  immediately	  followed	  by	  a	  description	  of	  
the	  man,	  “a	  Stallion	  driving	  up	  into	  you	  because	  thats	  all	  they	  want.”	  She’s	  
highlighting	  the	  sexual	  power	  dynamics	  that	  exist	  between	  the	  male	  and	  female	  
bodies.	  It’s	  important	  to	  note	  that	  the	  last	  man	  she	  had	  sex	  with	  was	  Boylan,	  and	  
even	  though	  she	  addresses	  men	  in	  general	  terms,	  Boylan	  has	  had	  some	  impact	  on	  
the	  way	  she’s	  thinking	  about	  sex.	  She	  also	  takes	  care	  to	  notice	  the	  violence	  that	  
exists	  when	  having	  intercourse.	  The	  male	  takes	  on	  the	  image	  of	  the	  “Stallion,”	  an	  
overbearing	  animal	  who’s	  then	  characterized	  by	  the	  “vicious	  look	  in	  his	  eyes.”	  This	  
	  

	  
	  

53	  

ambiguous	  “he”	  is	  then	  juxtaposed	  with	  the	  female	  image	  of	  “a	  big	  hole,”	  which	  
seems	  to	  be	  nothing	  other	  than	  an	  entrance	  for	  “him.”	  This	  entire	  image	  evokes	  a	  
certain	  amount	  of	  disdain	  coming	  from	  a	  woman	  who	  also	  celebrates	  her	  sexuality	  
and	  her	  desire	  for	  Blazes	  Boylan.	  It	  is	  also	  interesting	  to	  note	  how	  Molly’s	  “Stallion,”	  
which	  seems	  to	  reflect	  the	  well-­‐endowed	  Boylan	  contrasts	  the	  gelded	  horses	  from	  
“Lestrygonians”	  which	  Leopold	  identified	  with.	  The	  similarity	  between	  these	  
metaphors	  exists	  to	  further	  the	  isolation	  that	  exists	  between	  Molly	  as	  a	  lover	  and	  
Leopold	  as	  her	  impotent	  husband.	  	  
	  

Her	  exploration	  of	  the	  female	  anatomy	  versus	  the	  male	  anatomy	  continues	  

throughout	  her	  musings.	  Later	  on	  she	  says,	  	  
…Curious	  the	  way	  its	  made	  2	  the	  same	  in	  case	  of	  twins	  
theyre	  supposed	  to	  represent	  beauty	  placed	  up	  there	  
like	  those	  statues	  in	  the	  museum…are	  they	  so	  beautiful	  
of	  course	  compared	  to	  what	  a	  man	  looks	  like	  with	  his	  
two	  bags	  full	  and	  his	  other	  thing	  hanging	  down	  out	  of	  
him	  or	  sticking	  up	  at	  you	  like	  a	  hatrack	  no	  wonder	  they	  
hide	  it	  with	  a	  cabbageleaf	  that	  disgusting…	  
(“Penelope”,	  620)	  	  

	  
Molly	  displays	  a	  very	  jarring	  shift	  in	  tone	  here	  as	  opposed	  to	  the	  first	  time	  she	  
compares	  the	  male/female	  body.	  	  The	  hypercritical	  tone	  she	  used	  in	  the	  first	  
passage	  has	  become	  more	  of	  a	  mocking	  voice	  in	  this	  case.	  An	  important	  part	  of	  this	  
statement	  is	  her	  acknowledgement	  of	  the	  beauty	  of	  a	  female	  body	  versus	  that	  of	  a	  
man’s.	  While	  pondering	  the	  placement	  of	  breasts	  and	  how	  they	  look	  on	  statues,	  she	  
recognizes	  that	  they	  are	  more	  visually	  appealing	  than	  male	  genitalia.	  The	  way	  she	  
talks	  about	  male	  genitals	  is	  actually	  quite	  emasculating.	  The	  image	  of	  “two	  bags	  full”	  
and	  his	  “other	  thing”	  aren’t	  exactly	  appealing	  images	  to	  the	  reader.	  Her	  comparison	  
to	  the	  penis	  “sticking	  up	  at	  you	  like	  a	  hatrack”	  produces	  a	  comical	  image,	  which	  she	  
	  

	  
	  

54	  

then	  immediately	  judges	  as	  “disgusting.”	  The	  way	  in	  which	  she	  judges	  the	  male	  
anatomy	  in	  this	  passage	  reflects	  the	  part	  of	  her	  that	  previously	  felt	  vulnerable.	  She’s	  
asserting	  herself	  in	  this	  passage	  in	  a	  way	  she	  couldn’t	  when	  thinking	  of	  man	  as	  an	  
overbearing	  “Stallion.”	  	  
	  

	  The	  juxtaposition	  between	  the	  “hole	  in	  the	  middle”	  passage	  and	  the	  

“hatrack”	  passage	  reveal	  Molly’s	  internal	  struggle	  with	  her	  female	  body.	  She	  both	  
celebrates	  and	  condemns	  the	  female	  anatomy,	  at	  once	  criticizing	  it	  for	  being	  “a	  big	  
hole	  in	  the	  middle”	  (611),	  while	  then	  celebrating	  “the	  woman	  is	  beauty”	  (620).	  This	  
contradictory	  sequence	  of	  thoughts	  relates	  to	  Molly’s	  struggle	  in	  accepting	  her	  role	  
as	  “feminine	  woman.”	  Comparable	  to	  Leopold	  Bloom	  fighting	  against	  his	  own	  role	  as	  
“womanly	  man,”	  Molly	  is	  also	  trying	  to	  find	  balance	  between	  her	  “masculine”	  and	  
“feminine”	  desires.	  However	  it’s	  not	  just	  these	  performances	  that	  are	  causing	  
contempt,	  like	  Leopold	  in	  “Lestrygonians”,	  she’s	  also	  attempting	  to	  come	  to	  terms	  
with	  her	  female	  body.	  	  
	  

However,	  her	  “masculine”	  cravings	  materialize	  as	  carnal	  lusting.	  She	  

contemplates,	  	  
…I	  suppose	  its	  because	  they	  were	  so	  plump	  and	  
tempting…he	  couldn’t	  resist	  they	  excite	  myself	  
sometimes	  its	  well	  for	  men	  all	  the	  amount	  of	  pleasure	  
they	  get	  off	  a	  womans	  body	  were	  so	  round	  and	  white	  
for	  them	  always	  I	  wish	  I	  was	  one	  myself	  for	  a	  change	  
just	  to	  try	  with	  that	  thing	  they	  have	  swelling	  up	  on	  you	  
so	  hard	  and	  at	  the	  same	  time	  so	  soft…	  (“Penelope”,	  638)	  
	  
In	  this	  moment	  Molly	  reveals	  this	  “masculine”	  desire,	  her	  longing	  to	  experience	  sex	  
from	  a	  man’s	  perspective,	  one	  she	  imagines	  to	  be	  better	  than	  the	  woman’s.	  Her	  
reconciliation	  with	  man’s	  inability	  to	  refrain	  from	  sexually	  objectifying	  her	  is	  

	  

	  
	  

55	  

curious	  in	  this	  moment.	  In	  previous	  passages	  we’ve	  seen	  her	  denounce	  men	  as	  both	  
“vicious”	  and	  “disgusting,”	  and	  here	  she	  longs	  to	  be	  in	  their	  position.	  She	  maintains	  
her	  belief	  that	  women	  are	  used	  for	  man’s	  indulgence,	  first	  saying	  “nice	  invention	  
they	  made	  for	  women	  for	  him	  to	  get	  all	  the	  pleasure”	  (611)	  and	  then	  reiterating,	  “its	  
well	  for	  men	  all	  the	  amount	  of	  pleasure	  they	  get	  off	  a	  womans	  body”(638).	  However,	  
the	  animosity	  from	  the	  earlier	  moments	  is	  missing	  from	  her	  exploration	  of	  sex	  in	  
this	  passage.	  Men	  are	  no	  longer	  those	  animalistic	  predators,	  but	  someone	  to	  be	  
envied.	  “That	  thing	  they	  have”	  isn’t	  something	  she’s	  making	  fun	  of	  anymore,	  but	  
something	  she’s	  coveting,	  illuminating	  her	  “masculine”	  appetite.	  	  This	  appetite	  is	  
reflected	  earlier	  too,	  when	  she	  thinks,	  “God	  I	  wouldn’t	  mind	  being	  a	  man	  and	  get	  up	  
on	  a	  lovely	  woman…”(“Penelope”,	  633).	  	  
	  

The	  power	  she	  wishes	  for	  in	  these	  passages	  isn’t	  purely	  sexual	  in	  nature.	  She	  

feels	  exposed	  in	  her	  female	  body	  and	  craves	  the	  authority	  that	  is	  intrinsic	  in	  the	  
man’s	  role	  during	  sex.	  In	  her	  mind	  sexual	  authority	  is	  attributed	  to	  self-­‐agency.	  Sex	  
from	  the	  male	  perspective	  is	  a	  chance	  at	  freedom,	  a	  luxury	  that	  she	  doesn’t	  have	  as	  a	  
woman.	  By	  criticizing	  these	  sexual	  roles	  she’s	  successfully	  pointing	  out	  the	  
ridiculousness	  of	  both	  male	  and	  female	  sexual	  appetites.	  Even	  though	  each	  of	  these	  
moments	  reflects	  a	  certain	  amount	  of	  sexual	  subjection	  on	  the	  woman’s	  part,	  the	  
fact	  that	  she’s	  expressing	  these	  “masculine”	  desires	  as	  a	  woman	  subverts	  the	  
“woman	  as	  object”	  idea.	  As	  Devlin	  states,	  she	  undermines	  womanliness	  as	  she	  
performs	  it.	  	  
	  

Molly’s	  internal	  struggle	  to	  balance	  her	  “masculine”	  and	  “feminine”	  desires	  

stems	  from	  the	  previously	  mentioned	  feeling	  of	  empowerment	  she	  gets	  from	  

	  

	  
	  

56	  

embracing	  her	  “masculine”	  nature.	  As	  a	  woman	  she	  feels	  confined	  by	  the	  
“masculine”	  presence	  that	  surrounds	  her.	  She	  has	  been	  contextualized	  by	  the	  first	  
seventeen	  androcentric	  chapters	  and	  takes	  “Penelope”	  as	  her	  chance	  to	  fight	  for	  her	  
freedom	  to	  embrace	  her	  role	  as	  a	  manly	  woman.	  However,	  this	  is	  not	  an	  easy	  task.	  
Despite	  her	  internalized	  gender	  performances	  (of	  both	  male	  and	  female),	  outwardly	  
she	  must	  deal	  with	  the	  consequences	  of	  her	  gender.	  	  
	  

Molly	  feels	  as	  though	  Leopold	  has	  robbed	  her	  of	  her	  freedom.	  She	  thinks,	  	  
…All	  the	  things	  he	  told	  father	  he	  was	  going	  to	  do	  and	  me	  
but	  I	  saw	  through	  him	  telling	  me	  all	  the	  lovely	  places	  we	  
could	  go	  for	  the	  honeymoon	  Venice	  by	  moonlight	  with	  
the	  gondolas	  and	  the	  lake	  of	  Como…O	  how	  nice	  I	  said	  
whatever	  I	  liked	  he	  was	  going	  to	  do	  immediately	  if	  not	  
sooner…he	  ought	  to	  get	  a	  leather	  medal	  with	  a	  putty	  
rim	  for	  all	  the	  plans	  he	  invents	  then	  leaving	  us	  here	  all	  
day	  youd	  never	  know…	  (630)	  

	  
This	  moment	  reflects	  the	  musings	  of	  a	  woman	  who’s	  become	  trapped.	  When	  she	  
speaks	  candidly	  about	  how	  she	  had	  a	  suspicion	  that	  these	  plans	  were	  fabricated,	  it	  
shows	  the	  reader	  a	  more	  delicate	  side	  to	  the	  otherwise	  fiery	  woman	  she	  fronts	  in	  
the	  episode.	  The	  way	  she	  was	  able	  to	  take	  notice	  of	  Leopold’s	  lies	  and	  respond	  to	  
them	  shows	  her	  own	  strength	  when	  faced	  with	  the	  consequences	  of	  being	  female.	  
She	  finishes	  this	  thought	  with	  the	  muffled	  complacency	  of	  a	  woman	  who’s	  been	  
offered	  no	  other	  way	  out.	  Later	  on	  in	  this	  passage	  she	  goes	  on	  to	  say,	  “its	  worse	  
again	  being	  locked	  up	  like	  in	  a	  prison	  or	  a	  madhouse”	  (630).	  Her	  anger	  and	  
resentment	  towards	  Bloom	  seems	  to	  stem	  from	  these	  feelings	  of	  captivity.	  It	  makes	  
her	  choice	  to	  find	  solace	  in	  a	  man	  like	  Boylan	  more	  understandable.	  Not	  only	  does	  
he	  provide	  companionship,	  but	  he’s	  also	  her	  liberator.	  Joyce	  never	  shows	  Molly	  out	  
of	  her	  house	  but	  throughout	  the	  novel	  we	  become	  aware	  that	  she	  does	  participate	  in	  
	  

	  
	  

57	  

a	  professional	  life.	  She’s	  an	  affluent	  singer	  who’s	  being	  taken	  on	  tour	  by	  the	  
renowned	  Hugh	  Boylan.	  He	  not	  only	  acts	  as	  an	  outlet	  for	  her	  sexual	  frustrations,	  but	  
he’s	  also	  the	  key	  to	  her	  escaping	  the	  confines	  of	  the	  Bloom	  household	  and	  the	  
expectations	  she’s	  expected	  to	  uphold	  within	  her	  marriage.	  	  
	  

Post-­‐famine	  Ireland	  has	  constrained	  the	  sexually	  transgressive	  Molly	  Bloom.	  

After	  the	  famine,	  the	  woman’s	  role	  in	  Ireland	  faced	  serious	  setbacks.	  Most	  women	  
lost	  their	  access	  to	  economic	  independence,	  increasing	  the	  importance	  of	  the	  dowry	  
and	  forever	  changing	  the	  “marriage	  market”	  as	  it	  existed	  (Lee,	  38).	  Molly	  references	  
this	  idea	  of	  the	  dowry	  when	  reminiscing	  about	  Bloom	  and	  says,	  “he	  hadn’t	  an	  idea	  
about	  my	  mother	  till	  we	  were	  engaged	  otherwise	  hed	  never	  have	  got	  me	  so	  cheap	  as	  
he	  did”	  (Joyce,	  614).	  Apart	  from	  the	  growing	  significance	  of	  the	  dowry,	  because	  
families	  had	  so	  little	  to	  offer,	  the	  way	  relationships	  between	  boys	  and	  girls	  were	  
seen	  had	  to	  be	  completely	  reshaped.	  Families	  didn’t	  have	  the	  means	  to	  pay	  more	  
than	  one	  dowry	  or	  provide	  financial	  support	  to	  growing	  families.	  Oftentimes	  young	  
men	  weren’t	  given	  the	  same	  access	  to	  land	  and	  wealth	  that	  they	  would	  have	  had	  
previously,	  putting	  more	  economic	  stress	  on	  the	  fathers	  of	  both	  bride	  and	  groom.	  To	  
prevent	  unwanted	  pregnancies,	  there	  was	  a	  larger	  trend	  toward	  debasing	  sex,	  even	  
in	  marriage;	  “temptation	  must	  not	  be	  placed	  in	  their	  way…Sex	  posed	  a	  far	  more	  
subversive	  threat	  than	  the	  landlord	  to	  the	  security	  and	  status	  of	  the	  family”	  (Lee,	  
39).	  Children	  were	  no	  longer	  seen	  as	  a	  woman’s	  “most	  precious	  commodity”	  (Bitel,	  
113),	  but	  were	  instead	  a	  threat	  to	  a	  family’s	  economic	  stability.	  To	  successfully	  
debase	  sex,	  Catholicism	  continued	  to	  strengthen	  its	  influence	  on	  the	  Irish	  people.	  
Tom	  Inglis	  writes,	  	  

	  

	  
	  

58	  
The	  long	  19th	  century	  of	  Irish	  Catholicism	  meant	  that	  
not	  only	  did	  Catholic	  sexual	  attitudes	  penetrate	  more	  
deeply	  and	  last	  longer,	  but	  that	  it	  is	  difficult	  to	  find	  any	  
traces	  of	  resistance	  or	  challenges	  to	  the	  existing	  
normative	  order.	  (13)	  

	  
Catholicism	  has	  always	  demonized	  sex	  as	  “sinful”,	  and	  during	  the	  19th	  century	  
economic	  and	  social	  factors	  aided	  the	  church	  in	  upholding	  and	  instilling	  these	  values	  
within	  their	  younger	  generations.	  Religion,	  and	  what	  they	  taught	  in	  the	  ways	  of	  sex	  
and	  gender,	  became	  one	  more	  way	  of	  policing	  the	  people.	  Inglis	  goes	  on	  to	  assert	  
that,	  “maintaining	  ignorance	  about	  sex	  was	  central	  to	  limiting	  and	  controlling	  
pleasure…and…in	  turn	  was	  crucial	  in	  maintaining	  power	  over	  women	  or	  patriarchy”	  
(19).	  	  This	  connects	  to	  an	  earlier	  point	  made	  about	  Molly	  and	  her	  desire	  to	  escape	  
these	  constraints.	  Sex	  was	  a	  way	  towards	  some	  kind	  of	  social	  power	  that	  women	  in	  
the	  19th	  century	  did	  not	  have.	  Molly	  chooses	  to	  disregard	  these	  social	  norms	  and	  
define	  her	  own	  relationship	  to	  men,	  women,	  and	  sex.	  	  
	  

In	  the	  19th	  century	  a	  woman	  was	  expected	  to	  fulfill	  three	  main	  characteristics	  	  
The	  first	  was	  that	  she	  have	  an	  overwhelming	  desire	  to	  
marry,	  remain	  faithful	  in	  a	  life-­‐long	  union,	  and	  remain	  
subordinate	  and	  dependent	  in	  that	  relationship.	  
Secondly,	  the	  woman’s	  natural	  sphere	  was	  the	  domestic	  
where	  she	  engaged	  in	  reproductive	  and	  not	  productive	  
tasks.	  Mothering	  became	  newly	  defined	  and	  
confined…Thirdly,	  and	  most	  significantly,	  women’s	  
sexuality	  was	  totally	  contained	  in	  marriage.	  (McLouglin,	  
266)	  

	  
As	  heterosexual	  relationships	  began	  to	  change,	  these	  were	  the	  values	  that	  women	  
were	  expected	  to	  uphold.	  This	  changing	  dynamic	  between	  young	  men	  and	  women	  
contextualizes	  the	  world	  that	  surrounds	  Molly	  Bloom.	  Regardless	  of	  the	  fact	  that	  she	  
was	  raised	  outside	  of	  Ireland,	  she	  says	  that	  she	  and	  Leopold	  have	  been	  together	  16	  

	  

	  
	  

59	  

years,	  making	  her	  around	  17	  years	  old	  when	  they	  were	  married.	  Though	  we	  don’t	  
know	  when	  she	  came	  to	  Ireland,	  as	  a	  young	  woman	  she	  would	  have	  been	  exposed	  to	  
some	  of	  these	  ideas	  prior	  to	  her	  relationship	  with	  Leopold.	  Society	  can	  be	  closely	  
linked	  to	  sexuality.	  Molly	  reflects	  the	  type	  of	  woman	  who	  does	  transgress,	  and	  
therefore	  confronts	  this	  “existing	  social	  order,”	  confining	  her	  to	  the	  realm	  of	  “other.”	  
	  

These	  changing	  social	  and	  economic	  expectations	  are	  reflected	  in	  the	  ways	  

Molly	  reacts	  and	  fights	  against	  expected	  “feminine”	  gender	  performances.	  Even	  at	  
the	  beginning	  of	  the	  20th	  century	  she	  took	  notice	  of	  how	  contradictory	  these	  roles	  
seemed	  to	  be.	  	  In	  a	  brief	  moment	  towards	  the	  end	  of	  her	  soliloquy	  she	  addresses	  
some	  of	  the	  inconsistencies	  that	  exist	  in	  what	  men	  expect	  of	  women.	  She	  thinks,	  	  
…They	  always	  want	  to	  see	  a	  stain	  on	  the	  bed	  to	  know	  
youre	  a	  virgin	  for	  them	  all	  thats	  troubling	  them	  theyre	  
such	  fools	  too	  you	  could	  be	  a	  widow	  or	  divorced	  40	  
times	  over	  a	  daub	  of	  red	  ink	  would	  do	  or	  blackberry	  
juice…sweets	  of	  sin	  whoever	  suggested	  that	  business	  
for	  women	  what	  between	  clothes	  and	  cooking	  and	  
children…(Joyce,	  633)	  
	  
Molly	  focuses	  her	  attention	  in	  this	  passage	  on	  how	  she’s	  supposed	  to	  act	  as	  a	  
“feminine”	  woman.	  She	  starts	  by	  expressing	  her	  disdain	  for	  the	  anticipation	  men	  
have	  when	  having	  sex	  with	  a	  new	  woman	  that	  she’ll	  be	  a	  virgin,	  even	  if	  they	  know	  
otherwise.	  This	  speaks	  to	  how	  women’s	  bodies	  were	  viewed	  in	  the	  early	  19th	  
century	  leading	  into	  the	  20th	  century,	  that	  they	  were	  at	  once	  both	  lustful	  temptress	  
and	  virginal	  prize.	  She	  also	  addresses	  and	  ridicules	  the	  expectations	  that	  exist	  for	  
her	  gender	  once	  they’ve	  become	  a	  part	  of	  the	  home.	  Molly’s	  ability	  to	  criticize	  
whoever	  “suggested	  that	  business,”	  the	  business	  it	  seems	  of	  being	  a	  woman,	  the	  

	  

	  
	  

60	  

homemaker.	  Her	  frustration	  amounts	  from	  all	  of	  these	  gender	  roles	  that	  she’s	  
expected	  to	  uphold.	  	  
	  

Some	  of	  this	  anger	  we	  see	  in	  Molly	  also	  reflects	  upon	  on	  all	  the	  empty	  

promises	  Leopold	  has	  made	  to	  her	  throughout	  their	  marriage.	  While	  she’s	  
accustomed	  to	  these	  strict	  roles,	  she	  notices	  the	  disparity	  between	  what’s	  expected	  
of	  women	  versus	  men.	  She’s	  reclaiming	  her	  gender	  by	  feeding	  into	  both	  her	  manly	  
and	  womanly	  needs.	  When	  she	  thinks,	  	  
…Men	  again	  all	  over	  they	  can	  pick	  and	  choose	  what	  they	  
please	  a	  married	  woman	  or	  a	  fast	  widow	  or	  a	  girl	  for	  
their	  different	  tastes	  like	  those	  houses	  round	  behind	  
Irish	  street	  no	  but	  were	  to	  be	  always	  chained	  up	  theyre	  
not	  going	  to	  be	  chaining	  me	  up…(Joyce,	  639)	  	  	  
	  
These	  ideas	  become	  the	  basis	  for	  how	  she	  approaches	  the	  male	  sex	  through	  her	  
appropriation	  of	  “masculine”	  gender.	  This	  passage	  reflects	  her	  anger	  at	  the	  man’s	  
ability	  to	  take	  any	  woman	  he	  pleases	  while	  the	  woman	  remains	  something	  to	  be	  
“chained	  up”	  and	  used	  at	  his	  discretion.	  She	  finishes	  this	  bold	  statement	  when	  the	  
declaration	  that	  no	  man	  is	  going	  to	  be	  “chaining”	  her	  up.	  The	  “masculine”	  sexual	  
power	  she	  has	  been	  hankering	  for	  manifests	  itself	  in	  her	  ability	  to	  speak	  openly	  and	  
freely	  about	  her	  sexual	  desires	  and	  experiences.	  	  
	  

At	  the	  beginning	  of	  her	  monologue	  Molly	  addresses	  her	  frustrations	  relating	  

back	  to	  this	  idea	  of	  confinement	  through	  marriage.	  She	  says,	  	  
…Why	  cant	  you	  kiss	  a	  man	  without	  going	  and	  marrying	  
him	  first	  you	  sometimes	  love	  to	  wildly	  when	  you	  feel	  
that	  way	  so	  nice	  all	  over	  you	  you	  cant	  help	  yourself	  I	  
wish	  some	  man	  or	  other	  would	  take	  me	  sometime	  when	  
hes	  there	  and	  kiss	  me	  in	  his	  arms	  theres	  nothing	  like	  a	  
kiss	  long	  and	  hot	  down	  to	  your	  soul	  almost	  paralyses	  
you…(610)	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

61	  

Molly	  is	  openly	  addressing	  the	  double	  standard	  that	  exists	  between	  men	  and	  women	  
who	  crave	  sexual	  satisfaction.	  When	  looking	  at	  how	  men	  treat	  women,	  Molly	  is	  very	  
critical.	  She	  spoke	  of	  “picking”	  and	  “choosing,”	  and	  eventually	  “chaining”	  them	  up.	  
However,	  in	  this	  moment	  she	  mimics	  the	  same	  “masculine”	  desire	  to	  be	  intimate	  
without	  being	  “chained	  up”	  by	  one	  woman.	  She	  seems	  to	  envy	  the	  ease	  with	  which	  a	  
man	  could	  kiss	  freely,	  but	  when	  it	  comes	  to	  a	  woman	  they’re	  expected	  to	  “marry	  
first.”	  Her	  “masculine”	  and	  “feminine”	  desires	  blend	  seamlessly	  in	  this	  passage.	  She’s	  
craving	  both	  sexual	  freedom	  (a	  “masculine”	  trait)	  while	  also	  craving	  passion	  and	  
romance	  (arguably	  a	  more	  “feminine”	  characteristic).	  	  
	  

We’ve	  established	  that	  Molly	  believes	  sexual	  power	  is	  innate	  within	  men,	  

anatomically.	  She	  exemplifies	  this	  through	  her	  own	  carnal	  expression.	  The	  
“Penelope”	  episode	  was	  so	  controversial,	  in	  part,	  because	  of	  these	  instances	  where	  
Molly	  is	  blunt	  and	  desirous.	  When	  Molly	  reclaims	  her	  sexuality,	  it	  highlights	  her	  role	  
as	  a	  woman	  reclaiming	  her	  masculinity.	  The	  reason	  Molly’s	  sexuality	  is	  so	  
intimidating	  is	  that	  she	  not	  only	  enjoys	  intimacy	  in	  all	  its	  forms,	  she	  also	  enjoys	  
being	  the	  authority	  in	  such	  situations,	  a	  role	  we’ve	  recognized	  generally	  goes	  to	  the	  
man.	  When	  she	  reflects	  on	  one	  of	  her	  earliest	  sexual	  encounters,	  she	  emphasizes	  
this	  authority,	  	  
…He	  wanted	  to	  touch	  mine	  with	  his	  for	  a	  moment	  but	  I	  
wouldnt	  let	  him	  he	  was	  awfully	  put	  out	  at	  first	  …O	  yes	  I	  
pulled	  him	  off	  into	  my	  handkerchief	  pretending	  not	  to	  
be	  excited	  but	  I	  opened	  my	  legs	  I	  wouldnt	  let	  him	  touch	  
me	  inside	  my	  petticoat…I	  tormented	  the	  life	  out	  of	  him	  
first	  tickling	  him	  I	  loved	  rousing	  that	  dog…(Joyce,	  626)	  
	  
In	  this	  passage	  Molly	  is	  critical	  of	  the	  man’s	  role	  during	  sex	  while	  also	  embodying	  
that	  role	  (the	  authority).	  There	  are	  some	  very	  clear	  parallels	  between	  her	  in	  this	  
	  

	  
	  

62	  

passage	  and	  Bella/o	  from	  “Circe.”	  They	  each	  take	  charge	  as	  sexual	  tormenters,	  
accepting	  their	  power	  over	  the	  men	  they’re	  with.	  This	  particular	  moment	  is	  a	  
memory	  Molly	  is	  exploring	  from	  her	  youth,	  so	  the	  fears	  she	  associated	  with	  having	  
intercourse	  could	  be	  reflective	  of	  her	  age	  and	  less	  with	  being	  “feminine”.	  However,	  
the	  authority	  she	  takes	  in	  this	  situation	  is	  very	  telling	  of	  the	  woman	  she	  has	  become.	  
Her	  ability	  to	  say	  no	  when	  “he	  wanted	  to	  touch	  [hers]	  with	  [his]”	  is	  indicative	  of	  the	  
“masculine	  power”	  she	  is	  presenting	  to	  this	  young	  lover.	  Another	  indication	  of	  her	  
influence	  is	  the	  way	  she	  pretends	  not	  to	  be	  excited,	  remaining	  coy	  and	  uninvolved	  
while	  the	  man	  reaches	  climax.	  The	  enjoyment	  she	  got	  from	  “tormenting”	  and	  
“rousing”	  the	  boy	  only	  further	  proves	  that	  she’s	  embracing	  her	  role	  as	  the	  manly	  
woman.	  	  
	  

If	  Molly	  Bloom	  accesses	  her	  masculinity	  by	  speaking	  to	  her	  sexual	  desires,	  it’s	  

important	  to	  see	  the	  way	  in	  which	  her	  “feminine”	  desires	  are	  addressed.	  When	  
exploring	  Leopold’s	  “masculine”	  gender	  in	  the	  “Nausicaa”	  episode,	  Joyce	  juxtaposed	  
this	  show	  of	  “manliness”	  with	  an	  equally	  as	  elaborate	  show	  of	  “womanliness”	  
performed	  by	  the	  young	  Gerty	  MacDowell.	  In	  the	  context	  of	  this	  episode	  Gerty’s	  
femininity	  was	  defined	  by	  her	  desire	  for	  romance,	  a	  fantasy	  it	  seemed,	  that	  she	  
projected	  onto	  Leopold	  Bloom,	  the	  mysterious	  stranger.	  Despite	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  
verbalized	  contempt	  for	  the	  male	  gender,	  she	  also	  expresses	  her	  own	  need	  for	  
romance	  or	  courtship.	  	  
	  

Throughout	  “Penelope,”	  between	  moments	  of	  Molly	  fantasizing	  about	  sex	  or	  

lamenting	  about	  the	  men	  she’s	  encountered,	  a	  part	  of	  her	  begins	  to	  reconcile	  with	  
the	  lack	  of	  romance	  in	  her	  life.	  At	  first	  she	  thinks,	  	  

	  

	  
	  

63	  
…I	  wish	  somebody	  would	  write	  me	  a	  loveletter	  his	  
wasnt	  much	  and	  I	  told	  him	  he	  could	  write	  what	  he	  liked	  
yours	  ever	  Hugh	  Boylan	  in	  old	  Madrid	  stuff	  silly	  women	  
believe	  love	  is	  sighing	  I	  am	  dying	  still	  if	  he	  wrote	  it	  I	  
suppose	  thered	  be	  some	  truth	  in	  it	  true	  or	  no	  it	  fills	  up	  
your	  whole	  day	  and	  life	  always	  something	  to	  think	  
about	  every	  moment…(623)	  	  

	  
The	  simplicity	  of	  what	  she’s	  asking	  for	  here	  reflects	  on	  Molly	  as	  a	  woman	  who’s	  not	  
the	  harlot	  male	  Dublin	  makes	  her	  out	  to	  be.	  Just	  as	  Gerty	  was	  unashamed	  of	  her	  
“girlish”	  longings,	  Molly	  is	  coming	  to	  terms	  with	  her	  own.	  Even	  though	  she	  names	  
Boylan	  in	  this	  passage,	  she	  begins	  with	  the	  elusive	  “somebody,”	  alluding	  to	  her	  
detachment	  from	  Boylan	  emotionally.	  Even	  though	  this	  nameless	  somebody	  turns	  
into	  Boylan	  by	  the	  end,	  she	  makes	  him	  out	  to	  be	  incapable	  of	  such	  an	  act.	  The	  way	  
she	  finishes	  this	  declaration	  indicates	  the	  sadness	  she	  feels,	  associating	  her	  sexual	  
relationship	  with	  Boylan	  with	  a	  romance	  that	  doesn’t	  seem	  to	  exist.	  She	  
acknowledges	  this	  when	  she	  says,	  “I	  suppose	  thered	  be	  some	  truth	  in	  it	  true	  or	  no	  it	  
fills	  up	  your	  whole	  day”.	  The	  fact	  that	  she	  would	  settle	  for	  anything	  less	  than	  a	  true	  
declaration	  of	  love	  shows	  that	  she’s	  searching	  for	  something	  more	  than	  just	  sex.	  
Molly	  is	  searching	  for	  companionship.	  	  
	  

Molly’s	  relationship	  with	  Leopold	  never	  recovered	  after	  the	  loss	  of	  their	  

eleven	  day	  old	  son,	  Rudy.	  She’s	  satiated	  her	  sexual	  appetite	  with	  Boylan,	  but	  is	  still	  
yearning	  for	  something	  more	  amorous.	  Even	  though	  she’s	  not	  experiencing	  it	  in	  her	  
own	  life,	  she	  believes	  it	  exists	  somewhere,	  	  
…It	  must	  be	  real	  love	  if	  a	  man	  gives	  up	  his	  life	  for	  her	  
that	  way	  for	  nothing	  I	  suppose	  there	  are	  a	  few	  men	  like	  
that	  left	  its	  hard	  to	  believe	  in	  it	  though	  unless	  it	  really	  
happened	  to	  me	  the	  majority	  of	  them	  with	  not	  a	  particle	  
of	  love	  in	  their	  natures	  to	  find	  two	  people	  like	  that	  
nowadays	  full	  up	  of	  each	  other	  that	  would	  feel	  the	  same	  
	  

	  
	  

64	  

way	  as	  you	  do	  theyre	  usually	  a	  bit	  foolish	  in	  the	  
head…(631)	  
	  
This	  moment	  reveals	  the	  piece	  of	  Molly	  that	  remains	  hesitant	  when	  searching	  for	  
this	  all-­‐or-­‐nothing	  type	  of	  romance.	  Regardless	  of	  the	  fact	  that	  she	  believes	  “there	  
are	  a	  few	  men	  like	  that	  left,”	  she	  doubts	  that	  those	  men	  exist	  for	  her.	  We’ve	  talked	  
about	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  femininity	  is	  seen	  as	  weakness.	  This	  passage	  showcases	  
Molly’s	  inability	  to	  let	  herself	  fully	  embrace	  this	  piece	  of	  her	  femininity	  in	  fear	  that	  it	  
makes	  her	  too	  vulnerable.	  So	  instead,	  she	  reconciles	  with	  the	  idea	  that	  most	  men	  
will	  never	  feel	  that	  way	  and	  even	  if	  it	  does	  happen	  people	  who	  experience	  it	  are	  “a	  
bit	  foolish	  in	  the	  head.”	  Molly’s	  desire	  for	  “real	  love”	  becomes	  very	  indicative	  of	  her	  
“feminine”	  desires,	  and	  this	  passage	  reflects	  how	  far	  she’s	  had	  to	  separate	  herself	  
from	  those	  desires.	  	  
	  

Molly	  takes	  her	  time	  in	  “Penelope”	  attempting	  to	  figure	  out	  her	  own	  sexual	  

and	  emotional	  feelings	  about	  men	  in	  general,	  and	  in	  the	  end,	  Leopold.	  Suzette	  Henke	  
suggests	  that	  these	  thoughts	  reflect	  her	  fears,	  “And	  this	  pervasive	  fear	  –that	  her	  
husband’s	  sexual	  indifference	  is	  a	  sign	  of	  emotional	  rejection	  –dominates	  her	  
monologue”	  (Henke,	  151).	  I	  hesitate	  to	  agree	  that	  these	  feelings	  dominate	  the	  
“Penelope”	  episode,	  however,	  there	  does	  seem	  to	  be	  truth	  to	  what	  Henke	  believes.	  
Molly	  wants	  a	  relationship	  based	  off	  of	  more	  than	  sex,	  something	  she’s	  not	  getting	  
from	  her	  lover	  or	  her	  husband.	  The	  “sexual	  indifference”	  Henke	  attributes	  to	  
Leopold	  is	  also	  reflected	  in	  Molly.	  As	  a	  couple,	  they’ve	  chosen	  to	  emotionally	  isolate	  
themselves.	  However,	  I	  do	  believe	  there	  is	  a	  piece	  of	  Molly	  that’s	  afraid	  of	  being	  
rejected	  by	  Leopold.	  Even	  though	  she	  spends	  time	  musing	  about	  Boylan	  and	  

	  

	  
	  

65	  

fantasizing	  about	  Stephen,	  her	  monologue	  closes	  with	  memories	  of	  Leopold.	  There’s	  
a	  moment	  where	  she	  thinks,	  	  
…The	  day	  I	  got	  him	  to	  propose	  to	  me	  yes	  first	  I	  gave	  him	  
the	  bit	  of	  seedcake	  out	  of	  my	  mouth	  and	  it	  was	  leapyear	  
like	  now	  yes	  16	  years	  ago	  my	  God	  after	  that	  long	  kiss	  I	  
near	  lost	  my	  breath	  yes	  he	  said	  I	  was	  a	  flower	  of	  the	  
mountain	  yes	  so	  we	  are	  flowers	  all	  a	  womans	  body	  yes	  
that	  was	  one	  true	  thing	  he	  said	  in	  his	  life	  and	  the	  sun	  
shines	  for	  you	  today	  yes	  that	  was	  why	  I	  liked	  him	  
because	  I	  saw	  he	  understood	  or	  felt	  what	  a	  woman	  
is…(Joyce,	  643)	  
	  
This	  moment	  reflects	  upon	  a	  woman	  who	  hasn’t	  completely	  isolated	  herself	  from	  
her	  husband.	  The	  memory	  she	  chooses	  to	  return	  to	  is	  the	  same	  memory	  we	  
observed	  Leopold	  Bloom	  experience	  earlier	  on	  in	  the	  novel.	  Even	  though	  Joyce	  
chose	  to	  separate	  them	  throughout	  the	  course	  of	  the	  book,	  it’s	  significant	  that	  each	  
of	  them	  returned	  to	  this	  moment	  at	  some	  point.	  It	  shows	  that	  there	  is	  a	  romantic	  
connection	  that	  remains	  intact,	  even	  though	  they’re	  physically	  and	  emotionally	  
estranged.	  She	  also	  ruminates	  on	  how	  he	  made	  her	  feel	  in	  both	  body	  and	  mind.	  
Despite	  the	  way	  he	  made	  her	  feel	  after	  he	  kissed	  her,	  she	  remembers	  the	  way	  he	  
made	  her	  feel,	  like	  “a	  flower	  of	  the	  mountain.”	  Finally,	  she	  declares,	  “that	  was	  why	  I	  
liked	  him	  because	  I	  saw	  he	  understood	  or	  felt	  what	  a	  woman	  is…”	  This	  is	  one	  of	  the	  
most	  important	  things	  Molly	  reveals	  to	  the	  reader	  about	  her	  relationship	  to	  Leopold.	  
Even	  though	  we’ve	  discussed	  how	  femininity	  likens	  to	  weakness,	  it’s	  also	  something	  
that	  exists	  within	  Molly	  and	  Leopold.	  Leopold’s	  understanding	  of	  womanliness,	  and	  
what	  it	  means	  to	  be	  “feminine,”	  is	  something	  that	  was	  attractive	  to	  the	  strong-­‐willed	  
“masculine”	  Molly.	  Their	  roles	  as	  manly	  woman	  or	  womanly	  man	  became	  something	  
that	  drew	  them	  together.	  	  

	  

	  
	  

66	  

	  

Molly’s	  final	  statements	  revolve	  around	  her	  relationship	  with	  Leopold	  Bloom.	  

Everything	  she’s	  contemplated	  and	  divulged	  reflects	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  she’s	  chosen	  
to	  address	  her	  “female”	  gender	  performance	  while	  also	  addressing	  her	  
“masculinity.”	  In	  the	  end,	  Joyce	  has	  created	  a	  space	  where	  the	  labels	  “male”	  or	  
“female”	  lose	  all	  conventional	  meaning.	  Kimberly	  Devlin	  addresses	  this	  paradox	  
Writing	  Molly,	  Joyce	  forges	  a	  female	  voice	  that	  exposes,	  
in	  gestures	  of	  travestic	  imitation,	  the	  engendered	  
linguistic	  performances	  of	  her	  culture…only	  in	  the	  act	  of	  
trying	  on	  the	  female	  masquerade	  himself,	  was	  Joyce	  
enabled	  to	  feel	  the	  discomforts	  of	  the	  construct…Putting	  
on	  “womanliness”	  that	  repeatedly	  puts	  on	  “manliness”	  
allowed	  Joyce	  to	  articulate	  one	  of	  his	  canniest	  critiques	  
of	  the	  ideology	  that	  produces	  the	  oppressive	  categories	  
themselves.”	  (100)	  	  
	  
Throughout	  “Penelope”,	  the	  reader	  is	  faced	  with	  Molly,	  as	  she	  exists	  as	  both	  a	  
“feminine”	  and	  a	  “masculine”	  woman,	  and	  with	  the	  way	  in	  which	  these	  labels	  
become	  less	  tangible	  throughout.	  In	  this	  brief	  passage,	  Devlin	  approaches	  gender	  as	  
a	  cultural	  phenomenon,	  one	  that	  Joyce	  challenges	  through	  his	  characterization	  of	  
Mrs.	  Marion	  Bloom.	  We’ve	  explored	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  Molly	  embodies	  both	  
traditionally	  “masculine”	  and	  “feminine”	  qualities.	  Joyce	  allowed	  himself	  to	  find	  the	  
grey	  area	  that	  exists	  within	  binary	  conceptualizations	  of	  gender.	  Joyce’s	  process	  of	  
putting	  on	  the	  “female”	  mask	  encourages	  the	  reader	  to	  further	  question	  the	  ways	  in	  
which	  gender	  is	  presented	  to	  us	  throughout	  the	  novel.	  The	  way	  men	  and	  women	  are	  
expected	  to	  act	  versus	  the	  way	  they	  do	  act,	  especially	  when	  juxtaposed	  to	  
“traditional”	  images	  of	  masculinity	  and	  femininity	  (think	  Gerty	  MacDowell	  and	  the	  
various	  Irishmen	  throughout	  the	  novel),	  reveals	  the	  innate	  absurdity	  in	  these	  
predictable	  gender	  performances.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

67	  
If	  “Penelope”	  had	  some	  greater	  purpose	  in	  the	  overall	  structure	  of	  Ulysses,	  

what	  would	  it	  be?	  This	  isn’t	  meant	  to	  be	  an	  answerable	  question.	  More	  likely	  than	  
not,	  it	  will	  remain	  unanswered	  and	  contested.	  We’ve	  discussed	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  
Molly	  dons	  the	  masks	  of	  both	  “masculine”	  and	  “feminine”	  perspectives,	  and	  in	  the	  
process	  how	  she	  successfully	  undermines	  what	  exactly	  “masculine”	  or	  “feminine”	  
perspectives	  even	  are.	  Throughout	  the	  novel	  Joyce	  focuses	  on	  the	  male	  narrative.	  
These	  male	  voices	  are	  often	  interactive	  with	  each	  other,	  conversing,	  passing	  by,	  
reflecting	  on	  the	  world	  around	  them,	  etc.	  However,	  Molly’s	  episode	  remains	  
completely	  isolated.	  This	  narrative	  isolation	  has	  led	  many	  people	  to	  refer	  to	  
“Penelope”	  as	  Molly’s	  monologue	  or	  soliloquy.	  Richard	  Pearce	  challenges	  this	  idea	  
by	  bringing	  into	  his	  essay	  the	  idea	  that	  the	  “Penelope”	  episode	  is	  actually	  a	  dialogue.	  
He	  asserts	  that	  she’s	  speaking	  to	  the	  “ideal	  listener”.	  He	  claims,	  	  
…I	  would	  argue	  that	  Molly’s	  ideal	  listener	  is	  a	  woman,	  
with	  whom	  she	  can	  share	  her	  restlessness,	  her	  physical	  
desires,	  her	  fantasies,	  her	  cynical	  views	  of	  men,	  as	  well	  
as	  her	  realistic	  views	  of	  motherhood	  and	  menstruation	  
that	  don’t	  come	  from	  the	  dominant	  discourses	  of	  her	  
society”	  (Pearce,	  46)	  
	  
Immediately,	  this	  idea	  needs	  to	  be	  complicated.	  Limiting	  Molly’s	  character	  in	  this	  
manner	  complicates	  her	  role	  as	  a	  “masculine”	  female.	  Even	  though	  she	  does	  disclose	  
traditionally	  “feminine”	  problems	  (i.e.	  menstruation,	  motherhood)	  she	  does	  so	  in	  a	  
particularly	  “masculine”	  way,	  this	  “masculinity”	  is	  reflected	  in	  her	  vulgar	  openness	  
about	  the	  body	  and	  many	  of	  its	  sexual	  processes.	  Pearce,	  whose	  claims	  about	  Molly’s	  
gender	  performance	  remain	  pertinent,	  seems	  to	  undermine	  those	  thoughts	  with	  this	  
generalization.	  Who’s	  to	  say	  Molly	  can’t	  be	  speaking	  to	  both	  men	  and	  women?	  The	  
obvious	  point	  to	  make	  here	  is	  that	  readers	  of	  Ulysses	  are	  often	  both.	  It’s	  safe	  to	  
	  

	  
	  

68	  

assume	  that	  male	  readers	  don’t	  stop	  reading	  the	  novel	  once	  the	  male	  narrative	  has	  
ended.	  Therefore,	  it	  seems	  unreasonable	  to	  believe	  her	  predominant	  audience	  
would	  be	  female.	  However,	  this	  reading	  reflects	  the	  writing	  as	  Joyce	  has	  written	  it,	  
not	  taking	  into	  account	  Molly	  as	  a	  character.	  Perhaps	  Pearce’s	  ideas	  are	  that	  if	  Molly	  
were	  to	  share	  these	  opinions	  with	  anyone	  other	  than	  herself,	  it	  would	  probably	  be	  
with	  a	  woman.	  This	  idea,	  too,	  can	  be	  contested.	  As	  Pearce	  notices	  himself	  the	  way	  
Molly	  speaks	  “[doesn’t]	  come	  from	  the	  dominant	  discourses	  of	  her	  society,”	  
therefore	  a	  female	  listener,	  as	  they	  exist	  in	  “her	  society,”	  might	  not	  be	  able	  to	  relate	  
to	  Molly’s	  ideas	  or	  the	  way	  she	  presents	  them.	  
	  

The	  other	  argument	  that	  can	  be	  made	  against	  Pearce’s	  claim	  is	  the	  more	  

obvious	  one;	  the	  “Penelope”	  episode	  is	  composed	  as	  Molly’s	  personal	  stream	  of	  
consciousness.	  As	  mentioned	  before,	  Joyce	  chooses	  to	  isolate	  her	  narrative	  from	  the	  
remainder	  of	  the	  novel.	  In	  doing	  this	  he	  is	  able	  to	  create	  the	  unique	  and	  constantly	  
evolving	  person	  that	  his	  readers	  know	  to	  be	  Molly	  Bloom.	  It’s	  unclear	  if	  Molly	  is	  
addressing	  anyone	  in	  her	  thoughts.	  If	  she	  were	  to	  voice	  any	  of	  these	  opinions,	  would	  
she	  even	  trust	  a	  woman?	  Her	  relationships	  towards	  other	  women	  are	  characterized	  
through	  criticism,	  of	  their	  age,	  their	  competitiveness,	  and	  their	  looks.	  She	  says	  
things	  such	  as,	  “…women	  try	  to	  walk	  on	  you	  because	  they	  know	  you’ve	  no	  man…”	  
(Joyce,	  618)	  or	  “…God	  help	  the	  world	  if	  all	  the	  women	  were	  her	  sort…”(Joyce,	  608).	  
Her	  negative	  views	  on	  men	  are	  intertwined	  with	  equally	  negative	  views	  on	  women.	  	  
Therefore	  one	  should	  hesitate	  before	  assuming	  that	  even	  though	  Molly	  reflects	  a	  
certain	  type	  of	  woman,	  she	  speaks	  either	  to,	  or	  for,	  the	  other	  women	  of	  her	  society.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

69	  
Despite	  these	  multiple	  instances	  of	  hostility	  towards	  her	  sex,	  there’s	  one	  

moment	  where	  she	  seems	  to	  forget	  these	  opinions	  and	  voice	  her	  true	  belief.	  She	  
thinks,	  	  
…I	  dont	  care	  what	  anybody	  says	  itd	  be	  much	  better	  for	  
the	  world	  to	  be	  governed	  by	  the	  women	  in	  it	  you	  
wouldnt	  see	  women	  going	  and	  killing	  one	  another	  and	  
slaughtering	  when	  do	  you	  ever	  see	  women	  rolling	  
around	  drunk	  like	  they	  do	  or	  gambling	  every	  penny	  
they	  have	  and	  losing	  it	  on	  horses	  yes	  because	  a	  woman	  
whatever	  she	  does	  she	  knows	  where	  to	  stop	  sure	  they	  
wouldnt	  be	  in	  the	  world	  at	  all	  only	  for	  us	  they	  dont	  
know	  what	  it	  is	  to	  be	  a	  woman…(Joyce,	  640)	  

	  
Regardless	  of	  her	  past	  opinions	  and	  the	  competiveness	  she	  feels	  with	  other	  women,	  
this	  passage	  reflects	  an	  incredible	  boldness	  within	  Molly.	  Even	  after	  heavily	  
criticizing	  women	  and	  their	  inferior	  bodies,	  or	  their	  negative	  attitudes,	  she	  still	  
believes	  the	  world	  would	  be	  better	  off	  in	  their	  hands.	  Her	  opinions	  on	  men	  reflect	  
the	  “hyper	  masculine”	  stereotypes	  we’ve	  explored	  before,	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  men	  
are	  violent	  and	  drunks	  (as	  reflected	  in	  the	  “manly	  men”	  of	  Dublin,	  Leopold’s	  
friends).	  These	  are	  the	  men	  who	  shouldn’t	  be	  in	  charge,	  the	  ones	  who	  “roll	  around”	  
and	  “gamble	  every	  penny	  they	  have.”	  The	  affirmation	  that	  “a	  woman	  whatever	  she	  
does	  she	  knows	  where	  to	  stop,”	  is	  an	  interesting	  piece	  of	  this	  passage.	  She	  seems	  to	  
commend	  a	  woman’s	  ability	  to	  live	  with	  restraint.	  However,	  the	  argument	  could	  be	  
made	  that	  by	  declaring	  her	  own	  masculinity	  throughout	  the	  episode,	  she’s	  also	  
attempting	  to	  defy	  this	  restraint.	  She’s	  made	  more	  than	  enough	  references	  to	  being	  
confined	  and	  “chained	  up”	  for	  the	  reader	  to	  infer	  that	  she’s	  jealous	  of	  how	  society	  
celebrates	  a	  man’s	  lack	  of	  restraint.	  However,	  she	  remains	  assertive	  in	  her	  belief	  
that	  without	  women,	  men	  wouldn’t	  have	  the	  opportunities	  to	  live	  such	  lives.	  This	  

	  

	  
	  

70	  

passage	  also	  reflects	  the	  various	  female	  identities	  Molly	  chooses	  to	  take	  on	  
throughout	  the	  episode.	  Whether	  she’s	  proclaiming	  her	  internal	  strength	  as	  a	  
woman	  or	  fighting	  for	  her	  “masculine”	  sexual	  desires.	  	  
	  

Molly	  never	  wears	  the	  same	  mask	  twice.	  Her	  identity	  is	  constantly	  in	  flux,	  

creating	  the	  space	  for	  Pearce’s	  “dialogue”	  interpretation.	  Pearce’s	  claim	  about	  
“Penelope”	  being	  a	  dialogue	  is	  plausible	  if	  taken	  in	  a	  different	  context.	  In	  Kimberly	  
Devlin’s	  essay	  she	  confronts	  the	  multiplicity	  of	  roles	  Molly	  takes	  on	  within	  the	  
entirety	  of	  her	  episode.	  She	  claims	  that	  Molly	  performs	  such	  roles	  as,	  	  
…The	  jealous	  domestic	  detective,	  the	  professional	  
singer,	  the	  professional	  seductress…the	  unrepentant	  
adulteress,	  the	  guilt-­‐ridden	  adulteress…the	  exasperated	  
mother,	  the	  pining	  romantic,	  the	  cynical	  scold…the	  
frustrated	  housewife,	  the	  female	  misogynist…(Devlin,	  
81).	  
	  
Each	  of	  these	  performances	  could	  represent	  a	  different	  woman,	  a	  piece	  of	  Molly	  that	  
exists	  separately	  from	  every	  other	  piece.	  Therefore,	  maybe	  Pearce’s	  argument	  can	  
apply	  to	  “Penelope,”	  just	  not	  in	  the	  way	  he	  originally	  believed.	  Molly	  isn’t	  speaking	  
to	  some	  outside	  female	  audience;	  she’s	  conversing	  with	  the	  multiple	  women	  she’s	  
performing.	  Molly	  as	  the	  adulteress	  is	  speaking	  to	  the	  romantic	  who’s	  confronting	  
the	  misogynist,	  etc.	  When	  looking	  at	  “Penelope”	  this	  is	  actually	  a	  helpful	  way	  to	  
understand	  the	  structure	  of	  the	  narrative.	  Without	  punctuation	  or	  breaks	  in	  the	  
lines,	  it’s	  these	  numerous	  facades	  that	  actually	  direct	  the	  movement	  and	  evolution	  
of	  her	  thoughts.	  Molly	  Bloom’s	  narrative	  style	  accepts	  these	  multiple	  “feminine”	  
personalities	  while	  also	  challenging	  them	  with	  the	  incorporation	  of	  their	  
“masculine”	  counterparts.	  She’s	  able	  to	  speak	  to	  each	  of	  these	  performances,	  the	  
“masculine”	  woman,	  the	  “feminine	  woman,”	  the	  mother,	  the	  wife,	  all	  the	  while	  
	  

	  
	  

71	  

attempting	  to	  figure	  out	  her	  own	  place	  amongst	  them.	  Molly’s	  relationship	  to	  
womanhood	  is	  complicated,	  and	  becomes	  even	  more	  so	  through	  Joyce’s	  choice	  to	  
make	  her	  the	  manly	  woman	  counterpart	  to	  Leopold’s	  womanly	  man.	  Perhaps	  this	  is	  
her	  purpose,	  to	  continue	  the	  conversation	  about	  gender	  and	  how	  it	  will	  inevitably	  
play	  a	  part	  in	  Dublin	  society,	  her	  society.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

72	  

Works	  Cited	  
	  
Bitel,	  Lisa	  M.	  Land	  of	  Women:	  Tales	  of	  Sex	  and	  Gender	  from	  Early	  Ireland.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  Ithaca:	  Cornell	  University	  Press,	  1996.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Booker,	  M.	  Keith.	  "The	  Baby	  in	  the	  Bathwater:	  Joyce,	  Gilbert,	  and	  Feminist	  	  
	  	  	  	  
	  	  Criticism."	  Pro.	  JSTOR,	  n.d.	  Web.	  16	  Feb.	  2015.	  <http://www.jstor.org/	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  stable/40754943	  .>.	  
	  
Boon,	  Joseph	  Allen.	  "A	  New	  Approach	  to	  Bloom	  as	  'Womanly	  Man':	  The	  Mixed	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  Middling's	  Progress	  in	  Ulysses."	  JSTOR.	  James	  Joyce	  Quarterly,	  n.d.	  Web.	  25	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
Apr.	  2015.	  <http://www.jstor.org/stable/25476481>.	  	  
	  
Brown,	  Richard.	  James	  Joyce	  and	  Sexuality.	  New	  York:	  Cambridge	  University	  Press,	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
1985.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Callow,	  Heather	  Cook.	  "Joyce's	  Female	  Voices	  in	  'Ulysses.'"	  JSTOR.	  N.p.,	  n.d.	  	  
	  	  	  
Web.	  16	  Feb.	  2015.	  <http://www.jstor.org/stable/30225365>.	  	  
Devlin,	  Kimberly	  J.	  “Pretending	  in	  Penelope”:	  Masquerade,	  Mimicry,	  and	  Molly	  
	  
Bloom.	  Molly	  Blooms:	  A	  Polylogue	  on	  ‘Penelope’	  and	  Cultural	  Studies.	  Ed.	  
	  
Richard	  Pearce.	  Madison:	  University	  of	  Wisconsin	  Press,	  1994.	  80-­‐102.Print.	  	  
	  
Ellmann,	  Richard.	  James	  Joyce.	  New	  York:	  Oxford	  University	  Press,	  1965.	  Print.	  	  
	  
-­‐	  -­‐	  -­‐,	  Ed.	  Selected	  Letters	  of	  James	  Joyce.	  New	  York:	  The	  Viking	  Press,	  1975.	  	  
	  
Henderson,	  Diana	  E.	  "Joyce's	  Modernist	  Woman:	  Who's	  Last	  Word?"	  Project	  Muse.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  Johns	  Hopkins	  University	  Press,	  n.d.	  Web.	  16	  Feb.	  2015.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
<http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/mfs/summary/v035/35.3.henderson.html>.	  
	  
Henke,	  Suzette.	  “Uncoupling	  Ulysses”:	  Joyce’s	  New	  Womanly	  Man.	  James	  Joyce	  and	  
	  
the	  Politics	  of	  Desire.	  London:	  Routledge,	  1990.	  106-­‐125.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Henke,	  Suzette.	  “Molly	  Bloom”:	  The	  Woman’s	  Story.	  James	  Joyce	  and	  the	  Politics	  of	  
	  
Desire.	  London,	  Routledge,	  1990.	  126-­‐164.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Inglis,	  Tom.	  "Origins	  and	  Legacies	  of	  Irish	  Prudery:	  Sexuality	  and	  Social	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  Control	  in	  Modern	  Ireland."	  Project	  Muse.	  N.p.,	  n.d.	  Web.	  21	  Apr.	  2015.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
<http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/fro/summary/v034/	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
34.2.szczeszak-­‐brewer.html>.	  	  
	  
Joyce,	  James.	  Ulysses.	  New	  York:	  Vintage	  Books,	  1984.	  Print.	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

73	  

Lee,	  J.J.	  “Women	  and	  the	  Church	  since	  the	  Famine”.	  Women	  in	  Irish	  Society:	  The	  
	  
Historical	  Dimension.	  Ed.	  Margaret	  MacCurtain	  and	  Donncha	  O	  Corrain.	  
	  
Westport:	  Greenwood	  Press,	  1979.	  37-­‐45.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Leonard,	  Garry.	  “A	  Little	  Trouble	  about	  Those	  White	  Corpuscles”:	  Mockery,	  Heresy,	  
	  
and	  the	  Transubstantiation	  of	  Masculinity	  in	  ‘Telemachus’”.	  Ulysses	  En-­‐
	  
Gendered	  Perspectives.	  Ed.	  Kimberly	  J.	  Devlin	  and	  Marilyn	  Reizbaum.	  
	  
Columbia:	  U	  of	  South	  Carolina	  Press,	  1999.	  1-­‐19.	  Print.	  	  
	  
	  
McCormick,	  Kathleen.	  “Reproducing	  Molly	  Bloom”:	  A	  Revisionist	  History	  of	  the	  
	  
Reception	  of	  ‘Penelope’,	  1922-­‐1970.	  Molly	  Blooms:	  A	  Polylogue	  on	  ‘Penelope’	  
	  
and	  Cultural	  Studies.	  Ed.	  Richard	  Pearce.	  Madison:	  University	  of	  Wisconsin	  
	  
Press,	  1994.	  17-­‐39.	  Print.	  	  
	  
McLoughlin,	  Dympna.	  "Women	  and	  Sexuality	  in	  Nineteenth	  Century	  Ireland."	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  MaynoothUniversity.ie.	  N.p.,	  n.d.	  Web.	  21	  Apr.	  2015.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
<http://eprints.maynoothuniversity.ie/3536/1/DM_Women.pdf>.	  	  
	  
Pearce,	  Richard.	  “How	  does	  Molly	  Bloom	  Look	  Through	  the	  Male	  Gaze?”	  Molly	  
	  
Blooms:	  A	  Polylogue	  on	  ‘Penelope’	  and	  Cultural	  Studies.	  Ed.	  Richard	  Pearce.	  
	  
Madison:	  University	  of	  Wisconsin	  Press,	  1994.	  40-­‐60.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Shloss,	  Carol.	  “Milly,	  Molly,	  and	  the	  Mullingar	  Photo	  Shop”:	  Developing	  Negatives	  in	  
	  
‘Calypso’.	  Ulysses	  En-­‐Gendered	  Perspectives.	  Ed.	  Kimberly	  J.	  Devlin	  and	  
	  
Marilyn	  Reizbaum.	  Columbia,	  U	  of	  South	  Carolina	  Press,	  1999.	  42-­‐50.	  Print.	  	  
	  
Szeczeszak-­‐Brewer,	  Agata.	  "Joyce's	  Vagina	  Dentata:	  Irish	  Nationalism	  and	  the	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
Colonia	  Dilemma	  of	  Manhood."	  Project	  Muse.	  N.p.,	  n.d.	  Web.	  21	  Apr.	  2015.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  
<http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/eir/summary/v040/40.3inglis.html>.	  	  
	  
	  
	  

	  	  

	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

