Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2013

2013

Force of Gesture
Amy Jane Pedulla
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Pedulla, Amy Jane, "Force of Gesture" (2013). Senior Projects Spring 2013. Paper 57.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2013/57

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2013 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

Force of Gesture

Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Amy Pedulla

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2013

Acknowledgements
To Mom, Dad, Lauren, and all Pedullas: for your continued support and love throughout
this project.
To Jaime Bayard, a dear friend.
To Michael Ives and Ann Lauterbach for your passionate criticism and genuine
encouragement to pursue this research.
To Ammiel Alcalay for giving me A Little History.
To Wyatt Mason for an unrelenting attention to the improvement of my writing over the
past few years, for forcing me to say what needs to be said within the right margins, and
for teaching me to read in new ways.
And to Cole Heinowitz, a passionate advisor and inspiring woman: Thank you for
making me write this.

Contents

Preface (

1

Meaning in Movement

9

Olson

31

Gesture

64

Presence

90

Remarks

109

1
Preface (
I know very little about the language I use.
I have always been inspired by the possibilities of performance.
I read a poem by the San Franciscan poet Jack Spicer; my response after reading it was
to make a performance out of and inspired by his language.
It was a happening, a strange engagement with body, word, and movement. What
happened? A change of tense is needed: Two performers quote Cocteau behind a glass window
in the center of a science building while another recites a verse from Spicer’s poem. Someone
rides by on a bicycle while several dancers waltz up the stairs. They are intercepted by a cascade
of red balloons. The entire sequence unfolds in silence, until the ensemble performs a
complicated symbolic dance, sings a prayer inside an inflated pool, rushes to catch a Ford
Escalade that speeds off into the distance, abandoning the audience seated in the grass. The
building is a vacuum shot through with white light.
What happened unfolded as a sequence of events in front of the bystanders. The poem
became a silent movie reel enacted in real time, in real space.
I don’t know why reading did not suffice, why I decided to enact, so to speak, the words
themselves.
Since the event, I have realized that I know less about my interests than ever before.
What I do know is that I have wanted to write about both of these things, about the
cohesion between word and action, between language and performance, ever since I realized
that I could not ignore their relationship to one another. I had questions after the event: what
were the limits of language and the possibilities that can open up in live performance? What was
lost in the live performance that remained anchored to the original text?

2
Regardless of whether or not there are definitive answers to these questions, I obviously
have another that must be asked now:
It is simply this: What is the relationship between language and action?
I ask this question now with the same vigor I had a year ago when I made the
performance. It’s clear that the task ahead of me is not to respond in performance, but in words.
To get things straight. Or to complicate them more.
What I write in the following pages began by asking this question in the dark. I zealously
pursued the relationship between these two forms, looked the entries “language” and
“performance” up in the OED, discovered that their point of cohesion was in fact the word:
“action”.
Spicer cannot be found in the pages to come. Rather, I sift through the words of his
predecessor, the mammoth of a man, the mail carrier from Gloucester, Massachusetts who seems
to be asking similar questions. But the one I ask asking is my own and it hasn’t been answered by
any means.
Because it’s still bugging me.
This Gloucester poet is enormous in size. His body is unwieldy, giant.
I first came across his poetry a few years ago. I was perplexed, irritated by its complex
allusiveness. I quickly became discouraged by my inability to read it very closely. My attention
was short-lived. Though my immediate aversion to his work evaporated once I saw his body on
camera, witnessed the way it moved, understood the way his breath activated the words of the
poems, imbued them not with the meaning I could not decipher on my own but with such a
FORCE, an energy that was completely palpable. I had apparently missed something the first
time I struggled to read Maximus’s letters to Gloucester. His mannerisms and precise attention

3
to cadence, breath, and intonation completely altered the way I understood his approach to
poetry. I was anything but discouraged after seeing him on screen: I was only inspired to read
the work again, to make sense of this dramatic shift in my interest once I had seen a physical
enactment of the language. A cold first reading yielded very little insight, watching him
generated an unprecedented degree of interest.
There’s a particular moment I wish to describe here for the sake of getting across the
essential fact of his physical presence. He is reading “Letter 27[withheld]”. There is a lull of
silence in the first few seconds of the shot, he is sitting at a table calmly without speaking. The
next second he looks up with a slight smile and speaks the first line to the person sitting at the
other end of the table, out of my view. He speaks and I hear stone, the low grumble of sediment
utters the first few words in one breath. On the next beat he immediately reaches his left arm off
to one side on the words “the land falling off to the left”. Suddenly he flings the same arm
forward towards the person he is speaking to, talks of playing baseball in the summer “until no
flies could be seen”, points inward to his head with his index finger, then points back outwards
to locate the presence of some other object. He speaks: “until we came home”. In the next few
words, he takes a breath after “women”, elevates his head, fills the internals with air, inflates
the body with potential energy, and releases all the breath on the single word “bust”; he is
precise with the consonant on the end: says it sharp, then cuts he breath off. There is a lull. Then
the energy pathways changes, it builds. He pushes away the air to his left with his whole arm,
and then again to the right, designating place the “city” and the “sea” with his upper body. The
land, his physical core, the geography of place is within him, in his presence. Suddenly the
cadence of the words change, he lifts his eyebrows, pulls his whole hand through his open mouth
on the word “teeth”. He presses through the “sh” on “she” and “sure”; I mistake the sound to

4
be the word “shore”, but I am happy with my error: I suddenly see the ocean view he breathes
into my vision. In the next few lines he emphasizes in the same pointed mudra the word “this”.
He juts his right arm out towards another object that I cannot see. “This” is something I cannot
perceive, I can only understand the force of his arm, a slingshot he releases with the point of his
finger. The intonation of his voice changes. On “the precessions of me” his wrist and hand make
a rapid circle in the air. With “From all that I no longer am both hands rest on his chest, his
eyebrows arc up, he seems to convey some acceptance of truth. For a moment he rests his hand
atop the crown of his head and utters: “the slow westward motion”. His voice is careful over the
next line: “an American is a complex of occasions, themselves a geometry”. He shakes his head
back and forth quickly, as if to say that this idea is as unbelievable as it is incontestable. In the
next moment: “I am one with my skin”. With this he rolls his shoulders back, sending a rush over
the external plane of the body. The slight movement mimics the subtle oscillation of a fish in
water. “Plus this, plus this” are stated in rhythm, he prepares to take another breath. His arms
reach up above his head, his hands rest on the sides of his face, energy builds until he barks the
words “I compel”. At this point, both arms push outwards, the rocks in his voice rattle. “To
yield”: his voice is so low at this point he nears a low rumble, his hands are clenched in fists.
“Polis is this”: he swings his arms around his body, his head hung low by his chest, the last
word I hear is that same one from before: “this”.
I wonder what “this” means.
The body is the basis of Olson’s poetry. His gestures unleash the force behind the words.
A gesture made of the body, though, is not the same as a gesture made in language. The
latter is the basis of my endeavor to follow. My interest in Olson’s language is based in a
fascination with how he moves; how he theorizes the connection between body and word. Had I

5
not had such a hopeless experience upon my first reading of The Maximus Poems and had I not
later watched him read the work, I would have had no basis for my inquiry to follow. The force
behind my own writing here is my pursuit of the link between language and action. I write this
essay as changed reader: once critical, inert, and unenthusiastic, I’ve come to read Olson in a
completely new way. I wasn’t paying attention to the things that were there, in the poem, moving.
“This” is something that requires a second glance. It is there to be noticed.

6
SOCRATES: Wisdom (phronesis’). Wisdom is the understanding of motion
(phoras noesis) and flow. Or might it be interpreted as taking delight in motion
(phoras onesis) (411e). […] Knowledge (episteme) indicates that a worthwhile
soul follows (hepetai) the movement of things, neither falling behind nor running
on ahead (412a).
--Plato, Cratylus

These details show how the cries of the passions contributed to the development
of the operations of the mind by naturally originating the language of action, a
language which in its early stages, conforming to the level of this couple’s limited
intelligence, consisted of mere contortions and agitated bodily movements (115).
-- Etienne Bonnot de Condillac, “Essay On the Origin of Human Knowledge”
(1746)

Pantomime without discourse will leave you nearly tranquil; discourse without
gestures will wring tears from you. The passions have their gestures, but they also
have their accents, which thrill us, these tones of voice that cannot fail to be
heard, penetrate to the very depths of the heart, carrying there the emotions they
wring from us, forcing us in spite of ourselves to feel what we hear. We conclude
that while visible signs can render a more exact imitation, sounds more effectively
arouse interest (9).
--Jean Jacques Rousseau, “On the Origin of Language” (1781)

Words and deeds are quite indifferent modes of the divine energy. Words are also
actions, and actions are a kind of words.
-Ralph Waldo Emerson “The Poet” (1841-1843)
The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.
--Ludwig Wittgenstein, Logico-Tractatus Philosophicus (5.6) (1921)

7
This ‘may there be’ lets be the relation of word and thing, what and how it really
is. Without a word no thing is (152).
-- Martin Heidegger, On the Way to Language (1959)

The most real, the truth, the beauty of the poem is a configuration, but also a
happening in language, that leads back or on towards the beauty of the universe
itself. I am but part of the whole of what I am, and wherever I seek to understand I
fail what I know (3-4).
--Robert Duncan, “Towards an Open Universe” (1950)

When Platonic mimesis is applied to describe the poet’s act of creation, we are
confronted with the question: What is the material which he creates? What is the
actual content of an epos, or of a poem? (Havelock 165).
--Eric Havelock, “Preface to Plato” (1963)

For me, back of the idea of organic form is the concept that there is a form in all
things (and in our experience), which the poet can discover and reveal.
--Denise Levertov, “Some Notes on Organic Form”
(September 1965)

8

for
forwarding

—Charles Olson
The Maximus Poems, I.2, 6

9

Meaning in Movement

The idea of action necessitates an understanding of tense and time. Action has to do with
the relationship between a current situation, a sudden change, and the environment that is a result
of that change. Ralph Waldo Emerson writes about the relationship between words and actions in
his essay “The Poet”. The poet must bring the things of Nature into being by saying, by pointing
to, and naming each of them. The task of the poet is naming, and by doing so, the poet makes
language. This crucial position, this responsibility to bring into being those objects, things, that
the poet experiences in the world is a complicated process: one that involves the poet’s presence,
perception, thought, and choice. “But the poet names the thing because he sees it, or comes one
step nearer to it than any other” (Emerson 227). The poet names the thing as he alone sees it; he
puts the thing into language based on his perception alone.
Words are what the poet must use to bring the thing into the domain of language. Words
are actions, and actions are kinds of words, writes Emerson. Things are the objects in the world
that are later named. The poet that names things puts the world into the field of language. The
poet imbues language with a kind of power that makes words do things, “gives them power
which makes their old use forgotten” (Emerson 226). The task of the poet does not merely bring

10
things into being by naming them. The poet must activate words and make use of them in
alternative ways. The poet “puts eyes, and a tongue, into every dumb and inanimate object”
(Emerson 226). Here Emerson’s account of the poet deviates slightly. The poet, it seems, makes
the thing, the object he sees, act like a body.
The process of naming is not solely Emerson’s concern. In fact this conversation about
words, things, and the role that action plays in that tripartite relationship is one that precedes
Emerson. The process of naming, of bringing things into being through the medium of language,
is essential to an understanding of how perception functions and what the responsibility of the
poet as a name-maker is when he must put into words the things that he sees.
The Cratylus dialogue bears mentioning. Plato presents two perspectives of how this
process functions: on the one hand, Socrates and Hermogenes argue about the correctness of
names. Hermogenes adopts a theory that basically asserts that names are used by convention as
determined by the community in which that name is used. Opposed to Hermogenes is Cratylus
who asserts a very different kind of theory of naming which is steeped in a rationale that assumes
that names naturally name things, regardless of the convention of a given society or community.
Convention has nothing to do with this; things have their natural names. A tree is called a tree in
its being a tree. Obviously, the two perspectives are entirely oppositional. On the one hand,
Hermogenes exposes the arbitrariness of names; on the other, Cratylus suggests that things have
their proper names because nature commanded them to be so.
A closer look at the conversation reveals a great deal about how language works, and
how this triangular relationship between the three concepts introduced function in a larger sense.
Socrates eventually discounts both of these kinds of approaches. Despite his use of etymological
investigation, Socrates does not see the truth in the name once a word is genealogically traced

11
backwards to its origin because it does not assess the essence of the thing itself. He argues that
even though an excavation of a name down to its bare bones is possible, the bones themselves do
not address the thing in its entirety. The “bones” do not bring us to the things they were meant to
represent.
Socrates asks: “So whatever each person says is the name of something, for him, that is
its name?” (Plato, Cratylus 385d) The question seems to point to the immense possibilities of the
process of naming. The discussion continues:
HERMOGENES: Yes, Socrates, for I can’t conceive of any other way in which
names could be correct. I call a thing by the name I give it; you call it by the
different name you give it. In the same way, I see that different communities have
different names for the same things—Greeks differing from other Greeks, and
Greeks from foreigners.
SOCRATES: Let’s see, Hermogenes, whether the same also seems to you to hold
of the things that are. Is the being or essence of each of them something private
for each person, as Protagoras tells us? He says that man is ‘the measure of all
things,’ and that things are to me as they appear to me, and are you as they appear
to you. Do you agree or do you believe that things have some fixed being or
essence of their own? (385e-386)
The measuring of names by their “correctness” seems related to the idea that the name must near
the essence of the thing itself. If anyone can name any thing, then these names would inevitably
vary in their correctness perhaps. Though each thing appears to each perceiver as it does to them
alone.
The dialogue shifts once Socrates introduces the idea of speech, again applying the idea
of “correctness” to the act itself: “Tell me this. Is there something you call speaking the truth and
something you call speaking the false?” (Cratylus 385b2) He then develops the point that saying
names is a part of speech, and therefore using names is a “kind of action” (Cratylus 387c6). The
work of the so-called “rule setter” (389a) is that of making names. A name, according to
Socrates, is “a sort of tool” (388a) to be used. At this point, Cratylus’ argument is introduced to

12
explain that the act of naming is a natural process. If names are tools, they have particular
functions. “A name is a tool for giving instruction, that is to say, for dividing being” (388b) says
Socrates. The name-maker, then, cannot merely rely on convention, Socrates counters, because
the name must distinguish between things, between things in their essence. Only the person who
looks to the natural name of each thing will be able to make the name, to put the thing’s form
into language” (390e). Here Socrates agrees with Hermogenes’ opponent: “Cratylus is right in
saying that things have natural names, and that not everyone is a craftsman of names, but only
someone who looks to the natural name of each thing and is able to put its form into letters and
syllables” (390e). Cratylus does not believe in the making of names through some arbitrary
system. He believes that names naturally belong to the things they are describing. In this way, if
one refers to something that is not its natural name, Cratylus believes this act to be false. Using a
name that is not the natural name of the thing itself would be to refer to it incorrectly. Socrates’
method of determining corrections is one that relies on the etymology of words. Later, though,
Socrates mentions the things that the “speech-makers” named were in fact in motion: “Perhaps
you didn’t notice that they are given on the assumption that the things they name are moving,
flowing, and coming into being” (411c). Naming, it seems, is not only a process by which some
thing is given a name, a tool that describes its being, but that the things themselves are given a
name because they are moving. A few lines later Socrates parses the etymology of the word
Wisdom, which is revealed to be the understanding of motion and flow. A few lines later:
“‘Knowledge’ (episteme) indicates that a worthwhile soul follows (hepetai) the movement of
things, neither falling behind nor running on ahead” (412a). An understanding of motion or
“flow”, perhaps the recognition of one thing in relation to another, is part of the “speechmaker’s” task. Knowledge is he who follows the motion of all things presumably in the present

13
moment, neither behind nor ahead of himself in the present moment. The human that names
things, that puts action into language, has to see the world in a perpetual state of motion. At this
point, Socrates terminates his exploration of Cratylus’ argument. He believes that now, names
are so adorned, so removed from the things that they actually describe, that no one can
understand what the word itself means, what the things actually are (418d).
Cratylus and Socrates discuss this alternative perspective, that things are called by their
natural names. Socrates and Cratylus disagree on the position of the namer and his knowledge of
things. Socrates asks Cratylus whether the giver of the first names knew the things he named.
Cratylus answers yes. Socrates counters, and asks the question of whom the name-giver learned
those things from. The names had not been given before the name-giver gave the names to the
things themselves. If the things did not have names, how did the name-givers discover them?
How did the name-givers have knowledge of these things? Cratylus argues that a “more than
human power” gave the first names to things, so they are “necessarily correct” (438c). This
already puts into question the knowledge of the name-maker. So too, it exposes a problem in
Cratylus’ argument. Socrates argues: “How to learn and make discoveries about the things that
are is probably too large a topic for you and me. But we should be content to have agreed that it
is far better to investigate them and learn about them through themselves than to do so through
their names” (439b). To see things in motion is to come to know them, to know things only in
their names is to only investigate them partially. The question of what is a name is precarious. It
cannot be arbitrary nor is it naturally and divinely given. The only thing that is made clear by the
end of the argument is Socrates assertion that knowledge is indeed recognition of things in
motion, and that the process of naming is situated within this process. The process of naming is a
process of coming to know things: “Then it can’t even be known by anyone. For at the very

14
instant the knower-to-be approaches, what he is approaching is becoming a different thing, of a
different character, so that he can’t yet come to know wither what sort of thing it is or what it is
like—surely, no kind of knowledge is knowledge if what isn’t in any way” (440a). The instant is
a new idea that must be introduced in this strange flux of word, thing, and action. The moment
the knower-to-be approaches a thing, he is competes with another reaction, for the thing he looks
at is already changing. No name can possibly attest to the namer’s knowledge of the thing. This
calls to mind the question of what naming does. Is a name a reliable tool in any sense? Is naming
a claim to false knowledge? So too, where does knowledge find itself if everything is changing,
if its is always passing on? “On this account, no one could know anything and nothing could be
known either” (440b). The status of knowledge rests, perhaps, on the recognition that things are
in motion, and to know them is to recognize their flux. What is the position of the man who does
not know? “But surely no one with any understanding will commit himself or the cultivation of
his soul to names, or trust them and their givers to the point of firmly stating that he knows
something—condemning both himself and the things that are to be totally unsound like leaky
sinks—or believe that things are exactly like people with runny noses, or that all things are
afflicted with colds and drip over everything. It’s certainly possible that things are that way,
Cratylus, but it is also possible that they are not” (440c-d). So, one can only investigate things
and not accept everything about them easily. After having an experience with things, then, says
Socrates, one may share that experience. Experience is not the word that Socrates uses, but it in
fact encapsulates this relationship between the knower-to-be and the things they wish to know.
Aside from this notion of the knowledge of things and the experience of them as separate
from the process of naming itself, the interlocutors discuss the function of gesture. Socrates

15
postulates that if people didn’t have tongues or voices, they would need to use their body to
communicate ideas effectively:
SOCRATES: […] Answer me this: If we hadn’t a voice or a tongue, and wanted
to express things to one another, wouldn’t we try to make signs by moving our
hands, head, and rest of our body, just as dumb people do at present? […] So, if
we wanted to express something light in weight or above us, I think we’d raise
our hand towards the sky in imitation of the very nature of the thing. And if we
wanted to express something heavy or below us, we’d move our hand toward the
earth. And if we wanted to express a horse (or any other animal) galloping, you
know that we’d make our bodies and our gestures as much as like theirs as
possible (422e).
The question exposes the fact that were it not for the voice or the ability to speak, the rest of the
body would be the only means of communication. The speech-maker brings things into
language: a name gives something solidity in syllables. And yet, these names are false. They are
only approximations of the things themselves. To know the things is to experience them. The
using and making of names does not, in fact, grant the knower-to-be, the speech and rule-maker,
any knowledge at all. How can knowledge be attained then? How can the name-tool be used
differently? If there were no words, there were gestures.
Socrates, by the end of the dialogue, seems to combine aspects of both linguistic
arguments. He argues against Hermogenes, for he explains that some aspect of “the natural”
must be incorporated into his theory of naming. Arbitrary naming on the basis of geographical
location as dictated by the social sphere in which those people use that word is not merely
enough. Though as we have seen, Socrates disagrees with a purely naturalistic approach to
naming, for he believes that there is no name that could possibly encapsulate the thing it
represents, and in this way some degree of convention is needed.
How the name-maker does in fact come to name things cannot be done based on some
rule of convention or the laws of nature alone. Etymologies hollow out the things to their bones,
and leave only bones, only pieces of the things that once were. Arbitrary names only assess

16
things to a very small population of people; they do not seek to present things in their entirety.
Both interlocutors are proven wrong by Socrates on the basis that the path to knowledge is one
that requires an awareness of motion. The human body is healthy, its immunity goes down, it
catches a cold. It is in flux and a name cannot merely encapsulate it. So too are things in motion,
they change, move, act. There is something in gesture that gets the name-maker closer to the
things that he tries to name, closer to the motion of the thing itself. The name will more closely
represent the thing that it needs to if the name addresses the thing in its motion.
It is clear that naming is a kind of action and that a gesture of the body is a movement.
What is this relationship between language and the body, between a name and the thing it
represents? Of course Plato does not arrive at an answer in this dialogue, and the question still
remains. How gesture could come to bear on language, though, is a larger idea and it involves a
discussion of the origin of language itself. The making of words and the necessity of language as
an extension of man and the limits of his body, is precisely the problem that is dealt with in 18th
century language discourse.
Etienne Bonnot de Condillac and John Jacques Rousseau theorize the origins of language
and the position of the poet. Their ideas about language were preceded by a lineage thinkers that
sought to define perception: how humans observe the world and how thoughts were produced.
The development of the idea of “the language of action” is the basis of Condillac’s argument.
The movements of the body through the use of gesture are for Condillac the origin of all verbal
communication. This very idea separated Condillac from the Cartesian apparatus, exemplified by
Descartes and Locke alike, who considered the mind to be an entity unto its own as separate
from all sense impressions. Condillac’s argument in On the Origin of Human Knowledge births
the idea of a language that derives its meaning from bodies acting in a social space. At the

17
beginning, Condillac argues, the passions were inextricably linked to the body. The language of
action is understood to be the mode of communication through the use of the body. Through
gestures, the body is able to communicate effectively without speech. The body transmits
information and communicates through physical movements. Though Condillac’s development
continues to describe the development of a communication of another kind: one that incorporated
the use of signs: “Nevertheless, when they had acquired the habit of connecting some ideas to
arbitrary signs, the natural cries served as a model for them to make a new language. They
articulated new sounds, and by repeating them many times to the accompaniment of gesture that
indicated the objects to which they wished to draw attention, they became accustomed to giving
names to things” (Condillac 116). Thus the early language of action gave way to a kind of hybrid
communication: where both gesture and sound were needed in the process of naming. There was
a moment, though, when “speech succeeded the language of action” (Condillac 119). This
transformation was a displacement: speech “preserved the character of its predecessor”
(Condillac 120). With the absence of forceful, violent movements of the body, the voice
therefore had to perform the same degree of aggression: “the voice was raised and lowered by
strongly marked individuals” (Condillac 120). The language of action shifted then, into a
language that depended increasingly on the articulation of speech. Therefore the language of
action, as Condillac describes it, was one that depended on three things: the word, the body and
its gesture, and finally, the culture in which the language existed in, its the social sphere.
Condillac expands on the idea of sound in the chapter devoted to words. For one, he sees
the language of action as encompassing the following arts, all of which he views as interrelated
and dependent upon each other: “I could not allow any interruption of what I wished to say about
the art of gestures, dance, prosody, declamation, music, poetry: all these are too closely

18
interrelated as a whole and to the language of action which is their underlying principle”
(Condillac 156).
Jean Jacques Rousseau’s development of language in On the Origin of Language serves
as a supplement to Condillac’s argument that the language of action is the “seed of the languages
and of all the arts” (Condillac 194). Rousseau’s argument begins with the idea of speech and
communication. Speech for Rousseau “distinguishes man among the animals” (Rousseau 5) and
language “distinguishes nations from each other” (Rousseau 5). The essay begins with the
phenomenon of the desire to communicate: “Generally, the means by which we can act on the
senses of others are restricted to two: that is, movement and voice” (Rousseau 6). This fusion of
movement, speech, and the presence of a social sphere (in this case the need to communicate
with another person necessitates the presence of a culture) is akin to Condillac’s language of
action. Rousseau says that the language of gesture is more direct, depends less on convention,
and is more effective: “For more things affect our eyes than our ears” (Rousseau 6). Rousseau
makes the case that communication that appeals to the eye is more effective. Speech that
incorporates the image is the most effective means of communication. Sound is considered the
most powerful when it can produce the same effect of color, thus appealing once again to the
eye. Though, Rousseau’s argument changes when he speaks of the passions. His emphasis on
sound is important, and furthers Condillac’s idea of the language of action. The “tones of voice”
that Rousseau describes relocates speech in the language of action; the sound of speech brings
the auditor closer to the “depths of the heart”. Condillac and Rousseau here differ in their
assessment of what is heard as opposed to what is seen. Sound for Rousseau arouses interest,
forces the auditor to feel, to undergo an internal emotional experience. Visible signs
communicate in a more direct way, though speech is characterized by its degree of persuasion,

19
its ability to manipulate and activate the emotions. Rousseau concludes: “This leads me to think
that if the only needs we ever experienced were physical, we should most likely never have been
able to speak; we would fully express our meanings by the language of gesture alone” (Rousseau
9). Rousseau pinpoints the necessity of gesture in the communication of basic human needs.
Anything beyond that which could be signified by the body, is therefore not-necessary. Speech
comes into being once a need for something outside of what can be expressed by the body is a
possibility. Rousseau develops the idea of “unnecessary” speech: “It seems then that need
dictated the first gestures, while the passions stimulated the first words” (Rousseau 11). The
“depths of the heart”, the passions, are the basis for speech. The language that speech generates
is “vital and figurative” and furthermore it is “not at all due to people’s first needs” (Rousseau
11).
The language of action that is defined in Condillac’s argument and explored to some
extent by Rousseau is one comprised of three essential facets: word (logos), body, and culture.
How this kind of communication operates is unknown. Rousseau hypothesizes the various
characteristics of this kind of system:
This language would have many symptoms for expressing the same thing
according to various relationships. It would have few adverbs and abstract names
for expressing these same relationships. It would have many argumentatives,
diminutives, composite words, expletive particles to indicate the cadence of
sentences and fullness of phrases. It would have many irregularities and
anomalies (Rousseau 15).
A language that contained “few adverbs” would not approximate or describe the object it seeks
to represent, but rather, would present it as it is. A language in this case would act, would
“persuade without convincing, and would represent without reasoning” (Rousseau 15).
Under the possibility of “the language of action” a few terms must be clarified. The
question what is a word? and what is a verb? must be asked, for both of these structural

20
components of the language must be understood in relation to each other, to the extent that we
may come to understand how language performs, how it acts. We learn from Plato’s dialogue
that wisdom is the understanding of motion and flow. If this be the case, naming requires a
precise attention to kinesis.
American Transcendentalism focuses on the interrelation between language and
individual experience in the world. Emerson’s essay “The Poet” is primarily concerned with
words, actions and the position of the poet as a name-maker. The idea of coming to know things
by experiencing them, by refusing to accept things as they are, but rather, to acknowledge them
in perpetual motion, out of reach, is the position that the knower-to-be must take, says Socrates.
Emerson’s argument in “The Poet” attunes the conversation so that more emphasis is put on
behalf of the poet, the name-maker as such, so that despite the precarious nature of the process of
naming, it must be undertaken. Plato’s dialogue exposes the idea that this name-maker is one
who must perceive something and “put its form into letters and syllables”. So, the name-maker
is a craftsmen of sound; he must sonically embody the thing. Emerson says much the same in his
essay: “The men of more delicate ear write down these cadences more faithfully, and these
transcripts, though imperfect, become the songs of nations. For nature is as truly beautiful as it is
good, or as it is reasonable, and must as much appear, as it must be done, or be known”
(Emerson 220). The task of naming is not merely a solidification of thing in sound, but a striving
towards knowledge. This is Plato’s idea. Emerson says that nature offers the observer everything
as a “picture-language” (Emerson 222). The poet observes the world and must articulate it in
verbs and nouns. The notion that the name-maker “embodies” things is extended further by
Emerson by way of his metaphor: “The poet, by an ulterior intellectual perception, gives them a
power which makes their old use forgotten, and puts eyes, and a tongue, into every dumb and

21
inanimate object” (Emerson 226). The poet literally imbues things, objects, with life. With a
“body” so to speak. The “body” in which these things exist is in language. Like Plato, Emerson
claims that the poet “sees the flowing or metamorphosis” (Emerson 226), sees things in flux and
transition. Emerson situates himself at the very end of the dialogue and acknowledges the two
perspectives that surface: “By virtue of this science the poet is the Namer, or Language-maker,
naming things sometimes after their appearance, sometimes after their essence, and giving to
every one its own name and not another’s […]”. Emerson aligns himself with Socrates and states
that the poet, in choosing to name any particular thing, comes a step closer to knowing it.
Emerson’s stance that the poet literally imbues objects with life by naming them, by
using words to denote things, is problematic. Emerson believes, along with many Romantic
writers, that the meaning of the object is created by the beholder. The name-maker assigns
meaning to the objects in the world. Creation of meaning allows for a period of thoughtful
recollection about the meaning of the object. The instant the name is chosen, the poet digresses
into the thought about its very meaning. This complicates Emerson’s belief that words are
actions and actions are a kind of words. If words themselves are actions, they behold meaning in
themselves! Things in the universe are there and if we consider Socrates’ etymology, wisdom is
the recognition of things in flow: their meaning lies in their being there. No poet or name-maker
can imbue them with any more body than they already have. This is a difficult stance to take, and
the language debate continues despite this inherent problem with how meaning is determined.
It is difficult to reconcile this notion that the poet gives a name to a thing, gives one name
and not another, and in so doing, comes to understand the thing itself. But what of this flow of
objects? Things and words are understood with respect to one another, but what of actions? If the
very basis of naming, at least as far as Plato and Emerson are concerned is this comprehension of

22
flow and movement, if Emerson himself calls language “fossil poetry” (Emerson 227), what has
happened to the movement of things? Has their formalization in the word deadened them? If
things in the world are in motion, how can they be mobile in a frozen language?
Speech comes to bear on how language acts. Saussure explores the ideas of speech and
language in Course in General Linguistics. To begin, he deliberately opposes the two: “Whereas
speech is heterogeneous, language, as defined, is homogeneous. It is a system of signs in which
the only essential thing is the union of meanings and sound-images, and in which both parts of
the sign are psychological” (Saussure 961). Later, “language is concrete” (Saussure 961).
Saussure introduces this idea of the linguistic sign, which is composed of the sign and the
signified. In this view, the word itself is the sign of that which it signifies. The union of the
meaning and the sound-image constitutes the word. There is an inherent problem here with
Saussure’s categorization because it assumes a complete one-to-one correspondence between the
thing and the word itself. Already this is put into question by Plato in the Cratylus when Socrates
states that “It’s certainly possible that things are that way, Cratylus, but it is also possible that
they are not” (440c-d). There is a problem with words. If the word cannot account for the thing
as “sound-image” what does it represent? Perhaps the problem is that language is
representational, and to get away from this relationship between thing, and that which represents
it, the word itself has to do more than merely signify.
Heidegger’s On the Way to Language explores much the same discourse as Plato, the 18th
century Romantics, and Emerson. Heidegger’s articulation of the relationship between word and
thing is as follows: “From now on may the word be: the beginning of the thing. This ‘may there
be’ lets the relation of word and thing, what and how it really is. Without a word no thing is”
(Heidegger 152). Things do not exist, do not come into being, without the word. The philosopher

23
quotes a line from the poem “Words” by Stephan George: “Where word breaks off no thing may
be” (Heidegger 152). Where the word is lacking, a thing does not exist. Although Heidegger
appears relevant in this case to the discussion of words, things, and actions, there is a problem
with this statement. Things do exist in the world, they do constitute reality, regardless of the
words that are used to signify them.
Wittgenstein explores the relationship between thing and word, and the phenomenon of
naming in Philosophical Investigations. Early in the argument he makes the distinction between
the word and the meaning of the word: “You say: the point isn’t the word, but it’s meaning, and
you thing of the meaning as a thing of the same kind as the word, though also different from the
word. Here the word, there the meaning. The money, and the cow that you can buy with it”
(Wittgenstein 49e). There is a disjunction between the word as a symbol and the word as
something that conveys meaning. This problem with language has to do with what Wittgenstein
sees as a failure to “command a clear view of the use of our words” (Wittgenstein 49e).
Language must do work, independent of its ability to embody things. Rather, language serves its
communicative purpose. Often it is vastly imprecise and does not function in the way that it
needs to. These confusions in meaning are what Wittgenstein preoccupies himself with, and he
makes it his business to locate those moments when language is “idle, not when it is doing work”
(Wittgenstein 51e). What is the work of language? Perhaps here Wittgenstein critiques the
apparatus that Saussure has set up. The word, if it is to command a clearer view, must do more
than signify.
J.L. Austin’s focus in his essay “Performative Utterances” is the idea that names do not
always refer to existing objects. His idea of “performatives” explores the notion that words are
used to do things, to do work. The “work” of language is undertaken by Austin and requires

24
some close consideration. Granted, Austin’s exploration does not merely confine itself to the
performance of the single word, but rather, he explores the performativity of various cases of
“utterances”. He is concerned with sentences. Condillac’s original use of the term “the language
of action” comes to mind here, though what Austin is trying to establish a language that acts. He
opposes the assumption that philosophers make about the word “action”, that being that it merely
means a physical movement. Action for Austin is something wholly different with regards to the
sentence and how it is transmitted from speaker to receiver. The so-called “performative
utterance” is a particular statement that causes an action to subsequently occur. For instance, by
saying “I do” in a marriage pact, the subsequent action is one in which the following is executed:
two people are wed. So too, the promise functions in a similar way. When saying “I promise” the
act of promising is occurring. To say “he promised” for instance does not achieve this effect; it is
based in the past and does not cause an action to happen at present. Beyond the pronouncement
of these utterances, Austin explains that the clarity and effectivity of these utterances are subject
to a variety of compounding variables. For example, “the tone of voice, cadence, gesture—and
above all we can rely upon the nature of the circumstances, the context in which the utterance is
issued” (Austin 1437). Later, Austin’s argument concludes with his distinction between utterance
and statement. He assesses the utterance on the basis of the force of its delivery beyond what the
utterance means: “What we need beside the old doctrine about meanings is a new doctrine about
all the possible forces of utterances, towards the discovery of which our proposed list of explicit
performative verbs would be a very great help” (Austin 1442). The force of the utterance, the
energy behind it, is the question he leaves open-ended. Nonetheless, this sense that words
themselves contain energy and that they exert force is a new idea that opposes many of the

25
thinkers thus far. The meaning of words for Austin is in their autonomous ability to channel
energy, to make meaning through their own actions.
The relationship between words, things, and actions is one that has yet to be resolved.
This relationship for many theorists of language focuses on the position of the name-maker, the
poet, the knower-to-be. Things are the objects in the world that are experienced and remain in
flux. The knower-to-be experiences these things, and must name them. The process of naming is
complicated; a criterion the poet can rely on has not been found. Names are on the one hand
arbitrary, on the other naturally given. They are the sound-images that give things being and if
they do not exist, there are no things. The role of the poet and the responsibility of naming is put
into question when the idea of correctness is attributed to the name itself. Emerson says that the
poet brings form into being through sound, the making of syllables. The idea of communication
and language as a social phenomenon cannot be forgotten. Austin and Wittgenstein in their own
right have explored the effectivity of language and how it is that communication is inhibited by
the language we used in conversation. Compounding factors like intonation, circumstance, and
force of delivery matter in the saying of sentences as they effect the reception of words
themselves. What Austin explains that the other theorists don’t, however, is this idea that
language can itself perform an act and this act is done with force. Emerson believes that meaning
is assigned by the poet. He does not believe that words convey meaning in themselves. Instead,
the name-maker derives meaning, constructs it, and embodies it in the word. The language does
not exert a force on its own.
Representation brings language out of itself, and exposes the division between the sign
and the signified. Is there a kind of “language of action” that appeals both to the eye and the ear?

26
A kind of action not only on the level of the utterance, but on the level of the word? What kind of
action is required to make things and words move? What kind of force is necessary?
Emerson’s affirmation that meaning is assigned by the individual is an idea that
American poet Robert Duncan1 dogmatically opposes in the 1960s. Duncan describes
imagination very differently from Emerson, for instance. In his essay “Towards an Open
Universe” he states: “The imagination of the cosmos is as immediate to me as the imagination of
my household or my self, for I have taken my being in what I know of the sun and of the
magnitude of the cosmos, as I have taken my being in what I know of domestic things” (Duncan
1). Duncan aligns himself with the cosmos, with the universe. He fashions the poet, for example,
within the universe in which he lives. In this way, the poet cannot make things move with his
imagination, rescuing them from the fossilization that Emerson is worried about. Instead, the
individual that observes the world is faced with another challenge: he cannot make meaning, but
instead must discover it in the world as it is. Duncan explains the challenge with writing poetry:
it is an act of trying to align the poem with the happenings of the universe: “The most real, the
truth, the beauty of the poem is a configuration, but also a happening in language, that leads back
or on towards the beauty of the universe itself. I am but part of the whole of what I am, and
wherever I seek to understand I fail what I know” (Duncan 3-4). In simple terms, Duncan means
to say that the meaning of the universe is already determined, it is already fixed. No poet or
name-maker can create meaning, in fact he can only come to understand the meaning that
already exists, in the objects themselves. The poem, as such, is the location where the poet tries
to create a happening in language, just as it forcibly appears. Duncan wants the things in the
1

Though Duncan and Denise Levertov have been influenced by Olson and extend his theories in
their own work much later, I mention them here “before” Olson, to be considered relevant
thinkers to the lineage that has dealt with the relationship between word, thing, and action.

27
poem to act on their own, just as they do in life. Words do not signify anything other than what
they are doing (emphasis on the present progressive) in the poem itself. The words carry no
sentimental meaning, no ideological content that the poet may wish to “imbue” them with.
Instead the words act themselves in their own universe: on the page.
Duncan’s idea that words themselves are actions that operate just the way things in the
universe operate is compelling and helpful with regard to the relationship between word, thing,
and action. The poet, then, must navigate between the world of the universe and the world of the
page on which he writes. Although, the fact that the poet himself cannot make meaning seems
problematic. How can the poet evade responsibility for the creation of meaning in the writing of
poetry at all?
Eric Havelock’s Preface to Plato2 combines these ideas of language, naming, the poet,
and meaning. Havelock articulates the basic ideas of Plato’s philosophy with regards to
preserved communication through action. Duncan suggests that the poet cannot create meaning
through language. Havelock’s study of Plato’s work reveals a counter to Duncan’s views, and he
makes his point with reference to action: “When Platonic mimesis is applied to describe the
poet’s act of creation, we are confronted with the question: What is the material which he
creates? What is the actual content of an epos, or of a poem?” (Havelock 165). The poet uses
language, but also creates meaning. Later Havelock writes of the Homeric apparatus of the oral
storyteller that conveys language through the body: “The content of the epos should therefore
2

Olson writes a summarization of Havelock’s points in his essay “Review of Eric A. Havelock’s
Preface to Plato”: “(1) that [the poetry of Homer and Hesiod was based on] a wholly different
syntax, to which Notopoulos (1949) has applied the word parataxis in which the words and
actions reported are set down side by side in the order of their occurrence in nature, instead of by
an order of discourse, or ‘grammar’, as we have called it, the prior an actual resting on vulgar
experience and event” (356).

28
itself consist preferably of a whole series of doings […] You can be stimulated by words to
identify yourself with what ‘they’ say only when ‘they’ express emotions and passions in active
situations” (Havelock 167). So, the content, the meaning, of the poem is contained within a
series of happenings and actions. Force, impact, and meaning are perhaps located within the
action of the body. A provocative idea. One that challenges the basis of written language. Indeed,
Havelock writes: “Action presupposes the presence of an actor or agent. The preserved epos can
therefore deal only with people, not with impersonal phenomena” (Havelock 167). If meaning is
conveyed through action, how can the poet do so in language alone? And what kind of meaning
is to be conveyed if it must “deal only with people?”
The preservation of epos has to do with recording, with putting the things of the world
into words. Thus knowledge is preserved. However, once this occurs words solidify, they freeze.
Havelock writes about the translation of actual event into language: “First of all, the data or the
items without exception have to be stated as events in time[…]Second they are remembered and
frozen into the record as separate disjunct episodes each complete and satisfying in
itself[…]Action succeeds action in a kind of endless chain[…]Thirdly, these independent items
are so worded as to retain a high content of visual suggestion; they are brought alive as persons
or as personified things acting out vividly before the mind’s eye” (Havelock 180).
How is it that language is “so worded” so that the knowledge it is preserving is “brought
alive” or put into action? It is clear that tense and time are at play with the formation of language.
If words and actions are related, as Emerson says, how is it that knowledge is preserved but not
deadened? Wisdom is the understanding of motion and flow: how does that sensibility to kinetic
activity allow the poet to write in such a way so that events in time are recorded but not frozen?

29
Duncan says the poem is its own world. The motion of the universe and the motion of the poem
operate similarly: both are comprised of things, and these things act, move, and speak.
At the end of “The Poet” Emerson searches “in vain for the poet whom I describe. We do
not, with sufficient plainness, or sufficient profoundness, address ourselves to life, nor dare we
chaunt our own times and social circumstance” (Emerson 235). Emerson is looking for the poet
that would appear in the American tapestry a generation later. Gignomena, or a knowledge of
happenings, are experienced in many units (polla) rather than being understood in a system of
cause and effect says Havelock. If knowledge can itself be understood as a series of experiences,
perhaps language can as well be understood in terms of a motion of progression. And what is the
force of this progression? The poet who would make words move, who would create meaning
within motion, who would address himself to life and to language with considerable force is
Charles Olson.

30

you can’t use words as ideas any more than they can
be strung as sounds. They are meanings only and actions of
their own sort
-- Charles Olson
Collected Prose, 202

31

I. Olson

Olson spent his summers as a child on the seaport town of Gloucester, Massachusetts.
From 1950 through the late 1960s he composed The Maximus Poems, a five-volume collection
that focuses on American history in its broadest sense, while it localizes the entirety of the poem
in the city of Gloucester. The first generation modernist American poets, Ezra Pound and
William Carlos Williams, were of great influence to Olson. Maximus in some ways resembles
Pound’s Cantos. To develop an understanding of Olson’s poetry and poetics it is important to
mention that he is coming out of the legacy of these modernists. So too, Whitman, Thoreau, and
the American pragmatists embodied the historical and conceptual framework which Olson was a
descendent of, and these predecessors inevitably shape a great deal of what Olson eventually
comes to say about poetry. Olson himself is more often regarded for his writing of poetic
manifestoes (Hallberg 2) rather than his poems, although there is a risk in oversimplifying
Olson’s work by merely regarding the poetry and the poetics as two separate genres.
Action is at the very center of both Olson’s poetics and his poetry. The tripartite
relationship between word, thing, and action is a focal point of Olson’s work. For Olson, action
is a concept that can be understood on the level of the word, through the movement of the body,
and finally, with regards to the continuous changing of any culture and society. To approach the

32
idea of action in Olson is to first understand where he is coming from in American literary
history, and to realize where he is going. The action is one that incorporates body at its core, and
it is a body that operates in space, in time, and in history. The action that appears in Olson’s
work is that of the gesture. His attention to the movement of the body and interest in new
methods of communication makes Olson a relevant poet and theorist to consider in light of any
discussion worth having over language and the challenge with meaning making in words.
The critic that wishes to say something about Olson’s poetry is presented with an
enormous challenge. Olson’s emphatic poetic manifestoes (namely “Projective Verse”) are read
in classrooms and sited in discussions pertaining to American poetry after 1950 more often than
the poetry itself is read at all. His predecessors, most notably the canonical T.S. Eliot, Ezra
Pound, and William Carlos Williams are so often sited in discussions of post-war contemporary
American poetics, whereas Olson himself is often left to the wayside. There is a criticism of
Olson’s work that is common: the notion that his poetics are too monumental, that they demand a
view of poetry so great, that his poems cannot feasibly support the complexity of his ideas. The
critic and reader of Olson may find difficulty in saying something about the work, for his
ruminations, explanations, letters to friends, editors, students, and fellow poets that reveal an
enormous breadth of reading, knowledge, and insight into how poetry should be read and
composed, what the poet should do, and what verse can be, is difficult to ignore when faced with
the challenge to say something about the experience of reading Olson.
Though Olson’s essays and poetry should be read in tandem with one another: poetics as
a form of poetry and the poetry as a continuation of the poetics. No essay should be read onto
any one particular poem, and no unit of The Maximus Poems can be traced back to any one
dictum of his essays. Rather, it is important to keep in mind that poetry is defined in terms of

33
process for Olson. The poet William Carlos Williams writes in Book I of Paterson: “no ideas but
in things” a maxim that Olson recycles. So too the critic of Olson must apply this very idea to the
process of reading his work so that precise attention is paid to what is there in the poems
themselves. The scholar George Butterick provides a useful tool in his A Guide to the Maximus
Poems for any reader that wishes to chart a path through the entire collection. Above all else
precision of attention is the only thing the reader can go on.
Olson is concerned with history: one that is distinctly American. Olson is writing in the
wake of World War II. Postwar America explores “the active” and Olson is clearly working with
this idea as well. Olson’s influences go farther back in the American grain, though. 19th century
Pragmatism, pioneered by William James and James Dewey, for instance, introduced the idea
that knowledge is attained through the doing of things. There is cohesion between theory and
practice. James’ thoughts here link the knower with the doer. In this case the individual is called
to act, must perform some doing, in sum, must live up to what is expected of him in the vast
scheme of existence. Consider James’ idea of action in “The Sentiment of Rationality”:
The monstrously lopsided equation of the universe and its knower, which we
postulate as the idea of cognition, is perfectly paralleled by the no less lopsided
equation of the universe and the doer. We demand it in character for which our
emotions and active propensities shall be a match. Small as we are, minute as is
the point by which the cosmos impinges upon each one of us, each one desires to
feel that his reaction at that point is congruous with the demands of the vast
whole—that he balances the later, so to speak, and is able to do what it expects of
him (James 17,18).
What is essential here is James’ insistence on the link between the doer and the knower: the
acquisition of knowledge is attained by acting, by assuming some kind of responsibility and
fulfilling that duty.
John Dewey connects an individual’s action with the notion of experience. What is
experience? Dewey explores this in his writings in Experience and Nature: “We begin by noting

34
that ‘experience’ is what James called a ‘double barreled word’. Like its congeners, life and
history, it includes what men do an suffer, what they strive for[…] It is ‘double-barrelled’ in that
it recognizes in its primary integrity no division between act and material, subject and object, but
contains them both in an unanalyzed totality” (Dewey 8). Experience is composed of both
“thing” and “thought” in which both are recognized in unity. What men strive for, as Dewey
says, which can be referred to as their experience may be also thought of as striving towards the
unity of thought and thing. Though to have an experience, action must inevitably occur.
Olson’s essay “Projective Verse”, which first appeared in 1950 in the magazine Poetry
New York (Tytell vii), is perhaps the best place to begin in the pursuit of coming to understand
this idea of action as it relates to language and the act of writing. The essay serves as a kind of
preface to the rest of his ideas and as a response to the work of Pound and Williams before him.
The essay outlines how poetry should be composed on the page. It begins:

(projectile

(percussive

(prospective
(PV 15).

Notice the unbound parenthetical. Immediately we understand that the word is not confined: it is
left open to breathe, so to speak, to move outward. The first of the three: projectile. The word
meaning the sending of an object into space with some degree of force. At the very beginning of
the essay it is understood that motion is operating in language, that things are being sent, via
kinesis, outwards. The next word: percussive. Sound is the next word we see. It is as if the object
that came before this one, that has been projected into the air and finally: lands! And we hear it.
Motion and then the sound of its impact. The third word: prospective. Time is the third concept
unleashed. The temporality is one that is in the future, one that is about to happen, will come

35
eventually. Have we heard the object fall yet? Or are we waiting for it to hit the ground? Has it
even been launched into the air? This early succession of words, unhinged by the parenthetical,
sets up the essay to follow: it presents three concepts that will eventually come to bear on
Olson’s idea of action later in the essay and in the poems. Movement by force, sound of impact,
and the possibility of action are linked together.
The beginning of the essay sets up a dichotomy for the purposes of defining what
“projective verse” is in Olson’s terms. “Closed verse” or the “non-projective” Olson says,
despite the efforts of Pound and Williams, is a form of poetic composition that has existed in
American and English poetry up until now. Verse must be salvaged: the only way to do so, to
bring it back to life, so to speak, is to incorporate the breath into the work. “I want to do two
things: first, try to show what projective of OPEN verse is, what it involves, in its act of
composition, how, in distinction from the non-projective, it is accomplished; and II, suggest a
few ideas about what stance toward reality brings such verse into being, what the stance does,
both to the poet and to his reader” (Olson 15). Not only does Olson wish to distinguish the
projective from the non-projective, but he wishes also to affirm that the idea of the projective is
not only a form of composition, but that it is an outlook, a mantra so to speak, for how to engage
with the world. At the very beginning of the essay, we learn that Olson is not only attempting to
prescribe a remedy for the rigidity and density of closed form, but to so too suggest a new way to
live and engage in the world.
The “closed verse” that Olson is opposing is one that is fixed in form. Olson credits
Pound and Williams for instigating the transition in American poetry towards a more open form
at the beginning of the essay. For example, Olson’s idea that the poem on the page was a world
unto itself is an idea he reformulates after Williams before him. In Spring and All Williams

36
writes: “poetry: new form dealt with as a reality in itself” (67). Before him, Pound published a
collection of essays in 1934 entitled Make it New, based on the slogan he coined during the
modernism period. It would serve as a central imperative to his writing and as a fixed challenge
for future American poetic movements. Olson uptakes Pound’s challenge with the ideas he
presents in “Projective Verse”. Olson demands an attention to the present moment and calls for a
new configuration of language on the page that would explode the rigidity of verse prior to 1950
and offer up new possibilities for meaning making. To begin with, Olson states at the end of the
essay that T.S. Eliot is not projective. Consider the format of the poem “Love Song of J. Alfred
Prufrock” first published in 1915:

(Poetry: A Magazine of Verse)

37
Olson writes that Eliot’s lines are “dramatic”, but that he fails as a dramatist. What is drama?
Etymologically drama comes from the Greek term dran, which means “to do”. Eliot’s verse does
not achieve the dramatic effect Olson is looking for: the language does not act. Moreover, Eliot’s
closed verse cannot achieve the same impact that a so-called projective verse can because he
remains, in principle, within the mind and not the body. Thus, Olson opens with his first demand:
that the breath and the totality of the body be incorporated back into the process of poetic
composition. Pound and Williams get closer to what Olson demands of the poet at the start of
1950. Compare The Pisan Cantos with Paterson:

38
As with Eliot, the poems are formally confined to the left side margin of the page. Olson’s verse
experiments with structure explicitly. Consider these two forms in contrast to a stanza of
“Steven’s Song”, which can be found in Volume III of The Maximus Poems for instance:

(MP, III.37,404)
The stanzas are pulled towards the southeast. The left margin of the page is no longer a
constraint. Olson was interested in the potential of language once the breath was incorporated

39
into the composition of poetry. There are three qualities that Olson provides that distinguish the
projective from the non-projective: “(1) the kinetics of the thing. A poem is energy transferred
form where the poet got it (he will have some several causations), by way of the poem itself to,
all the way over to, the reader” (Olson 16). The idea of the projected object is recycled here. The
poem itself is some kind of interstitial region between where the poet got the energy, to the poet,
all the way to the reader. The poem is a record of this passage of energy. Projective verse, as
measured by its kinetics, reveals this relationship between reader, poet, and energy source.
“FIELD COMPOSITION” as Olson terms it, allows the poet to situate himself within this energy
circuit, he is aware “instant-by-instant” of the forces operating between poet and energy source,
between poet and poem, and between reader and poem.
The second facet of this new kind of outlook is “the principle, the law which presides
conspicuously over such composition, and, when obeyed, is the reason why a projective poem
can come into being. It is this: FORM IS NEVER MORE THAN AN EXTENSION OF
CONTENT” (PV 16). The poet Robert Creeley is to credit for this idea. Creeley means to
emphasize here that the way something is said, declares what is being said. The form dictates the
what that is being communicated. For the purposes of this idea of the projective, Olson means to
say that the form, the open-verse composition, dictates what is being said in is openness, it so too
allows for this stance towards reality to be realized within the functioning of the verse as such.
The third piece of this argument that Olson provides is the following:
Now (3) the process of the thing, how the principle can be made to shape the
energies that the form is accomplished. And I think it can be boiled down to one
statement (first pounded into my head by Edward Dahlberg): ONE PERCEPTON
MUST IMMEDIATELY AND DIRECTLY LEAD TO A FURTHER
PERCEPTION. It means exactly what is says, is a matter of, at all points (even, I
should say, of our management of daily reality as of the daily work) get on with it,
keep moving, keep in, speed, the nerves, their speed, the perceptions, theirs, the
acts, the split second acts, the whole business, keep it moving as fast as you can,

40
citizen. And if you also set up as poet, USE, USE, USE the process at all points,
in any given poem always, always one perception must must must MOVE,
INSTANTER, ON ANOTHER! (PV 17)
It is easy to see in Olson’s explanation in the essay that he favors movement: the excessive use of
comma splices between each new thought moves the sentence forward, until the moment when
the text is in bold, and there is a moment where both the writer and reader can take a breath,
release energy, and move on to the next idea. The essay itself in form assumes the kind of
generative movement that he wishes the poems to uphold. The idea of process is difficult to
understand simply. What must be understood here though is the idea that one perception must
immediately and directly lead to a further perception. The process of perception is one that
operates in such a way that perceptions lead from one into the next: so much so that the process
or succession of perceptions is the focus, and not the individual perceptions themselves.
MOTION here occurs when perception is seen as a process between things and not particular,
distinct moments of experience. The task of the poet, then, is to put this process TO USE! The
idea being: to make one perception move on another, in verse, in open form, in language.
Olson considers the composition of the poem to be process-based. In terms of The
Maximus Poems, each poem is not its own distinct unit. Rather, they are structurally connected to
one another, so that seen in their entirety they stitch together a whole. Rosemarie Waldrop makes
the connection in her “Charles Olson: Process and Relationship” that The Maximus Poems is the
knotting together of a net. This is somewhat problematic, for it supposes that the final result is a
single product: a physical object. For Olson poetry writing is process writing. Olson studied the
work of the English philosopher Alfred North Whitehead, specifically his book Process and
Reality. In it, Whitehead outlines a complicated view of reality, the cosmos, and physical reality.
Whitehead himself opposes the views of perception that are outlined by such thinkers like

41
Descartes and Locke: instead, he posits a view of reality that challenges the Cartesian idea of
substance, which suggests that minds and bodies exist to stand in need of nothing beyond
themselves. Whitehead challenges this idea of “furniture” as Olson and others have described it
and instead posits that the world is ever-changing and expanding, it is not frozen but in constant
motion, in a perpetual state of becoming. Olson’s idea of the projective connects to this very
premise. As Shahar Bram writes in Charles Olson and Alfred North Whitehead: “Olson
perceives the space of the poem as living and breathing. He develops a poetics of events and
process whereby the long poem is viewed as a continuously expanding poetic universe, enabling
a poetics of multiplicity within unity” (Bram 25). The relationship between body and language is
another aspect of Olson’s poetics that will eventually connect to this notion of action. But this
immediate point must be made clear: the poem, like the universe, is expanding. Each poetic
“unit”, each letter, each piece of text in the poem constitutes the whole, and that whole is
continuing to expand. As such, Olson’s “work” is one in the process of occurring. Maximus is a
work that continues to grow, open up, extend outwards. Whitehead writes in Science and the
Modern World:
Thus nature is a structure of evolving processes. The reality is the process. It is
nonsense to ask if the color red is real. The color red is ingredient in the process
of realization. The realities of nature are the prehensions in nature, that is to say,
the events in nature (429).
This is one of those moment’s in Whitehead’s rhetoric that seem to appear like a flash of light in
the midst of seemingly impenetrable theory, at least for a reader who has not encountered him
before. But this idea seems so relevant and applicable to Olson and his sense of how perception
functions. The world is an ever expanding idea, the reality of it’s existence is a process. It is
“nonsense” to ask if the color red is “real” because the color red, as Whitehead says, is the
process of realizing that it is so. The event, the happening upon the color red is what Whitehead

42
is focused on, and it is this very idea that Olson emphasizes in The Maximums Poems. Consider
part of “Letter 9”:
I, dazzled
as one is, until one discovers
there is no other issue than
the moment of
the pleasure of
this plum,
these things
which don’t carry their end any further than
their reality in
themselves
(MP, I.42, 46)
There is no other issue than the moment of. The moment of what? Of some action that will
happen, that will be a source of pleasure. The moment of “this plum” is to say that the plum is
moving, the same way that the recognition of the color red is the process by which the viewer
comes to understand the color red. These “things”: be it color, as denoted by the word “red”, the
moment of the thing, the fruit, the name it bears, they only call attention to the reality in
themselves. They don’t carry their end any further than the fact that they exist. The “realness” of
the pleasure of eating a plum is not a question that should be asked. There is no other issue that
the moment, the instant.
The physical comes to bear on the composition of lines in a poem. Olson begins this
explanation of the atomics of language with the syllable: “Let’s start from the smallest particle of
all, the syllable. It is the king and pin of versification, what rules and holds together the lines, the
larger forms, of a poem” (PV 17). At the basis of the line is this small structural unit, this small
piece of language material that holds the line together. This emphasis on the syllable is later
revealed to be inextricably tied to the senses, to the body: “I say the syllable, kind, and that it is
spontaneous, this way: the ear, the ear which has collected, which has listened, the ear, which is

43
so close to the mind that it is the mind’s, that it has the mind’s speed…” (PV 18). In The
Maximus Poems the same is stated: “said he, coldly, the/ ear!” (MP, I.2, 6). The ear as part of the
sensorial machinery listens and understands, like the mind. Later: “it is from the union of the
mind and the ear that the syllable is born” (PV 17). The mind and the ear birth this small
structural unit of language. The BODY necessitates an engagement with language, even on this
atomic level.
The syllable is a structural component, though. It builds to form lines, and lines later
form poems. The line, Olson states, does not come out of the EAR, but the BREATH: the lungs:
“The line comes (I swear it) from the breath, from the breathing of the man who writes, and thus
is, it is here that, the daily work, the WORK, gets in […]” (PV 19). Here we understand Olson’s
process of writing literally as living; writing is evidence of the fact that the poet is breathing and
working (the man who writes, and thus “is”). The ear first brings the syllable into being, and then
the breath formulates the line. The body and its senses necessarily determine how the language is
composed. Olson formulates a blueprint for this kind of translation:
the HEAD, by way of the EAR, to the SYLLABLE
the HEART, by way of the BREATH, to the LINE (PV 19).
The direction of this translation from body to language is outward, and that direction is one that
must be understood beyond Creeley, for example whom Olson dedicates his Maximus to: “for
ROBERT CREELEY—the Figure of Outward” (MP).
The direction outward, the movement of the line as an extension of the breath, this
relationship between text and body, is the focus here. Though, the line is comprised of a variety
of things, words, objects, and these internal components are part of this action that is done
outward. Similes, Olson says, slow the line down. By comparison and by likening things to other
things, the line does not hold a sense of immediacy, and does not possess the same force. They

44
“drain on the energy which composition by field allows” (PV 20). The field is a new idea: “(We
now enter, actually, the large area of the whole poem, into the FIELD, if you like, where the
syllables and all the lines must be managed in their relations to each other.) It is a matter finally
of OBJECTS, what they are, what they are inside a poem, how they got there, and once there,
how they are to be used” (PV 20). The FIELD: the vast expanse of space on which the poem
operates contains within it objects, and objects that must be used. The similie, for example, does
not allow this process to occur, because the object does not act, instead it is likened to another
thing that performs an entirely different operation. Through comparison, the two function in
relation to each other and they lose their force. This idea of objects in the poem that are put to
use is the key to understanding Olson’s sense that the poem must operate the way reality does:
“(the syllable, the line, as well as the image, the sound, the sense) must be taken up as
participants in the kinetic of the poem just as solidly as we are accustomed to take what we call
the objects of reality; and that these elements are to be seen as creating the tensions of a poem
just as totally as do those other objects create what we know as the world” (PV 20). The poem
itself would, if it uses objects in such a kinetic way, create tensions and structures of meaning the
same way that objects in the world illustrate what we know to be our reality.
The key to understanding the poem that contains real things is the idea of speech:
“Because breath allows all the speech-force of language back in […] everything in it [the poem]
can now be treated as solids, objects, things;[…]yet each of these elements of a poem can be
allowed, once the poem is well composed, to keep, as those other objects do, their proper
confusions” (PV 21). Each object operates in its own way, in its own space; it has its own
confusions. Everything in the poem can be treated as “solid” as real. Speech gives language
force, and because of this, the objects within the poem are charged, they contain matter, they are

45
“solid” in the vague sense that they can be moved, recognized as whole, they have substance:
they are not ideas. They are tangible things. The way that these things move, the way that they
operate within both the line and the larger whole involves grammar. Looking to Olson’s work in
the poems a bit later, it will be understood that his use of grammar and syntax is so precise so as
to allow these solids to operate, to move, in a very specific way.
Olson sites Ernest Fenollosa at this point in the essay. Fenollosa’s essay “The Chinese
Written Character as a Medium for Poetry” deals with language as an action precisely. The first
claim that must be understood is that of succession: “Perhaps we do not always sufficiently
consider that thought is successive, not through some accident or weakness of our subjective
operations but because the operations of nature are successive. The transferences of force from
agent to object, which constitute natural phenomena, occupy time” (Fenollosa 14). Thought is
(perhaps) successive, because things that happen in nature occur consecutively, in time. Consider
Fenellosa’s mention of the function of gesture aside the presence of an image: “If we all knew
what division of this mental horse-picture each of these signs stood for, we could communicate
continuous thought to one another as easily by drawing them as by speaking words. We
habitually employ the visible language of gesture in much this same manner” (Fenollosa 15).
“The visual language of gesture” communicates something, stands in place of something,
“continuously”, without the aid of verbal language. The ideogram, like the gesture,
communicates meaning. However, the meaning, according to Fenollosa, is one that is distinctly
verbal. The image stands in place of the action: “It is not so well known, perhaps, that the great
number of these ideographic roots carry in them a verbal idea of action. It might be thought that
a picture is naturally the picture of a thing, and therefore the root ideas of Chinese are what
grammar calls nouns” (Fenollosa 16). Here Fenollosa introduces the connection between

46
language and action. The picture represents the thing, or in the grammatical sphere: the noun. So,
the image represents the things, or nouns, doing actions in order, in succession.
Fenollosa pauses for a moment to describe the noun, the small familiar thing in the world:
“A true noun, an isolated thing, does not exist in nature. Things are only terminal points, or
rather the meeting points, of actions, cross-sections cut through actions, snap-shots” (Fenollosa
17). What happens between things is the idea. So, in grammatical terms, the verb would fit in
between these two nodes: “Neither can a pure verb, an abstract motion, be possible in nature.
The eye sees noun and verb as one: things in motion, motion in things” (Fenollosa 17). In Letter
9 Maximus writes: “the flowering plum/out the front door window/sends whiteness/inside my
house” (MP, I.41,45). The kinetic effect that the plum has is the plum’s significance. The
meaning of the object is in this case the plum’s very presence.
Fenollosa expresses the idea of the sentence in two specific ways: “Their [grammarians]
definitions fall into two types: one, that a sentence expresses a ‘complete thought’; the other, that
in it we bring about a union of subject and predicate” (Fenollosa 17). Fenollosa opposes the
presence of both of these functions in nature. In the former, the one that calls to mind the
expression of a complete thought, Fenollosa makes clear that “no full sentence really completes a
thought[…] The truth is that acts are successive, even continuous; one causes or passes into
another” (Fenollosa 17). In the second model, he unites the subject and predicate: “The sentence
according to this definition is not an attribute of nature but an accident of man as a
conversational animal” (Fenollosa 18). Man as a conversational animal, as the agent that through
speaking, transmits energy, is at the center of this discussion. The sentence operates in the
following way:

47
term
from
which

transference
of
force

term
to
which
(Fenellosa 18)

The sentence proceeds in succession from the “term from which” to the “term to which”. The
between, the “transference of force” is the action that is done from one thing to another. The
operation is simplified: “agent

act

object” (Fenollosa 19). This particular

formulation “brings language close to things, and in its strong reliance upon verbs it erects all
speech into a kind of dramatic poetry” (Fenollosa 19). So language apparently needs to be
oriented towards things, the familiar, the objects in the world so that it may perform action.
Olson writes: “But there is a loss in Crane of what Fenollosa is so right about, in syntax, the
sentence as first act of nature, as lightening, as passage of force from subject to object, quick, in
this case, from Hart to me, in every case, from me to you, the VERB, between two nouns” (PV
21). The VERB between two nouns acts like the passage of energy between two distinct things.
The second half of Olson’s essay has to do with his idea that the projective involves not
only a very particular attention to how things are operating in the poem, but so too how they
function in reality. This task is one that involves the poet himself remaining physically present in
the world and through precise attention, devotes himself to the appraisal and notice of things:
“But breath is man’s special qualification as animal. Sound is a dimension he has extended.
Language is one of his proudest acts. And when a poet rests in these they are in himself (in his
physiology, if you like, but life in him, for all that) then he, if he chooses to speak from these
roots, works in the area where nature has given him size, projective size” (PV 26). From breath,
to sound, to language, man has executed a kind of act. There is a sense here in these lines that the

48
idea of presence is essential to the act of writing. In order to write, man’s body must be present,
he relies on his senses, he breathes, and then he creates language. The act of writing poetry is the
process by which the poet navigates from perception to written word. Olson concludes the essay:
“[…]a projective poet will, down through the workings of his own throat to that place where the
breath comes from, where breath has its beginnings, where drama has to come from, where, the
coincidence is, all act springs” (PV 26). The projective poet enacts language, BECAUSE the poet
has a body. All act springs from within the body, from its source, outwards.
This idea that language is an extension of the body is hard to imagine, at least as far as
Olson’s process is concerned. How is it that Olson’s body, his physical matter, comes to bear on
the poem itself? By what sequence of events does the poet’s body get itself into the poem? If the
poem is itself a process, and not a product, how can we come to understand the process by which
the energy of the body infiltrates the word?
This idea that the body is the essential underpinning of language of Olson’s poetics is
expanded upon in the essay “Proprioception”. Olson here makes his argument on the basis of the
actual physiology of the body, its physical matter. He begins with a definition:
Physiology:
the surface (senses- the ‘skin’: of ‘Human Universe’)
the body itself- proper
—one’s own ‘corpus’: PROPRIOCEPTION the cavity of the body, in which
the organs are slung: the viscera, or interceptive,
the old ‘psychology’ of feeling,
the heart; of desire, the liver, of sympathy,
the ‘bowels’; of courage—kidney etc—
gall[…] (P, 182).
The cavity of the body contains the organs, the internal parts. This is where the feeling dwells: in
the physiology of the tissues, the ligaments, and the skin. Later we get “PROPRIOCEPTION: the

49
data of depth sensibility/ the ‘body’/ of us as object which spontaneously/ or of its own order
produces experiences/ of ‘depth’ Viz/ SENSIBILITY WITHIN THE ORGANISM/BY THE
MOVEMENT OF ITS OWN TISSUES” (Olson 182). The movement of the body through the
extension of its tissues reveals, the sensibility of that body. Olson has only described the sense of
the body moving, perhaps as a reflection of the internal workings of the body.
‘ACTION’—OR, AGAIN, ‘MOVEMENT’
This ‘demonstration’ then leads to the
same third, or corpus, thing or ‘place.’
the
proprious-ception
‘one’s own’-ception
the ‘body’ itself as, by movement of its
own tissues, giving the data of, depth (P, 183).
The body collects information and “gives data”. The moving body allows an individual to form
“one’s own ception”. The active body is one that has undergone experience. The individual body
is distinct, it records and perceives experience entirely differently than any other body would.
Later he reveals that the soul is a physical part of the body:
The soul is then equally physical. Is
the self. Is such, ‘corpus’. Or—to levy
[…]
surface (senses) projection
cavity (organs—here read ‘archetypes’)
unconscious the body itself—
consciousness: implicit accuracy, from
its own energy as a state of implicit
motion (P, 184).
Consciousness is the body acting in a state of implicit motion. William James’s essay “The
Sentiment of Rationality” is relevant to Olson’s attention to the physical body and its connection
to the accumulation of experience over time. James argues that in order to know things, the body
must do something, must act in such a way so as to have an experience, and that experience is

50
unique to that particular body. The notion that the body must act then becomes a kind of duty, it
is assumed and it is necessary in order to come to know things. Olson’s phrase “energy as a state
of implicit/motion” seems to describe a similar system, where the individual acts without
question, performs a duty, assumes responsibility. Olson introduces the concept of ‘istorin in A
Special View of History3, a term he gets from his reading of Herodotus. It means “finding out for
oneself”. The attention Olson places on the individual is central to an understanding of what he is
attempting to do within poetry. The individual body that interacts with space and the objects
within it undergoes an experience. Olson’s American outlook for poetry has to do precisely with
his insistence on space. In Call Me Ishmael, an analysis of Herman Melville’s Moby Dick, Olson
introduces this very premise: “I take SPACE to be the central fact to man born in America, from
Folsom cave to now. I spell it large because it comes large here. Large, and without mercy. It is
geography at bottom, a hell of wide land from the beginning. That made the first American story
(Parkman’s): exploration” (17). The body is the instrument for experiencing the world; the
American body explores SPACE, boundless space. Picture the geographic plane: two oceans
bracket the terrain that dwells within them. The unexamined terrain is confined within the closed
parenthesis:
ocean (land) ocean
)

SPACE

(

4

3

Olson delivered these series of lectures at Black Mountain College, (where Olson met Creeley, Duncan,
and many other artists that were teaching there at the time such as choreographer Merce Cunningham,
whose classes and lectures Olson attended regularly, John Cage, Buckminster Fuller, and a slew of other
American avant-garde thinkers and writers. Olson’s influence can be seen in the work of poets such as
John Wieners, Jonathan Williams, Ed Dorn, Joel Oppeenheimer, Michael Rumaker, and many others who
were students at the college during the 1950s. Olson first taught in 1948 and then resumed his position in
1951 until 1956.

4

This is how I see the parenthesis working with regards to SPACE and the American at least. The
symbols are actually FORCED outwards when the poet wills himself onto the expanse of the page, thus
confronting the space that is closed, until it is attended to with precision and force.

51
American exploration explodes the confines of the closed parenthesis. The acting body forces
these limits outward. Olson uses the open-ended parenthesis in The Maximus Poems repeatedly
to further his projective outlook and to perhaps signify this force outwards onto the page, like the
American who wills himself onto the geography in order to pursue his experience.
The body that interacts with SPACE, with a plane of any kind, is dependent upon its own
energy source. What must be noted before any further consideration of Olson’s theory is the fact
that the work of the postwar American painters, Olson’s contemporaries, is emblematic of an
essential concept: the gesture. Carter Ratcliff’s The Fate of A Gesture and Harold Rosenberg’s
essay “The American Action Painters” surmise that action painting was a process-based
phenomenon and one that involved the active body of the artist. Rosenberg writes: “At a certain
moment the canvas began to appear to one American painter after another as an arena in which
to act—rather than as a space in which to reproduce, redesign, analyze or ‘express’ an object,
actual or imagined. What was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event” (2). The plane
of the canvas in some ways resembles Olson’s “field” on the page. The vast expanse of space
allows for infinite possibilities for action to occur. Ratcliff’s argument centers around the action
painters, namely Pollock, and considers the development of his aesthetic: “The artist’s postures
signal no falsity; though he’s not painting, he is not acting. He is behaving and appears to be at
one with his behavior, like someone running not for form but to get somewhere quickly”
(Ratcliff 8). This idea that the painter “behaves”, needs to get somewhere quickly, is akin to
Olson’s own regard of writing as “process” or as “work”. The scale of Pollock’s paintings is
made possible through his use of the gesture; the marks made on the canvas cohere with the body
that performed the action: “Even a small poured painting is ungraspably large in scale; and even
the largest has a human scale, because it is a residue of the artist’s gestures” (Ratcliff 70). Drip

52
lines on the canvas convey much more than visual complexity and depth on the plane. They
materialize the internal energy pathways of the body. They bear the evidence of the mobile body
that produced them. Robert Duncan seems to allude to the gesture, with regards to language,
when he describes Olson’s work in “Towards an Open Universe”: “the totality of the body is
involved in the act of the poem, so that the organization of words, an invisible body, bears the
imprint of the physical man” (Duncan 11). Ratcliff argues that the total spatial magnitude, the
infinity that the canvases convey, locate the same boundlessness in the body: “the infinite were
bodily and the body were infinite” (Ratcliff 70). Through Pollock’s use of gesture, the energy of
the body is literally projected onto the canvas: the product depicts a space that is interminable,
and by virtue of the fact that the body was implied in its creation, the dimensions of the corporeal
are thrust open onto the plane. The result is the documentation of the event: the interaction
between human body and space.
Thus the gesture can be understood to be an American action: Olson’s insistence on the
individual’s pursuit of SPACE is akin to the painter’s confrontation of the space of the canvas.
The gestures that the artist, the poet, the American left behind are the markings of a human being
confronting the physical openness, potentiality, and possibility that space allows for. Space was
Pollock’s concern as well. “Pollock ‘left us at the point where we must become preoccupied with
and even dazzled by the space and objects of our everyday life, either our bodies, clothes, rooms,
or if need be, the vastness of Forty-second Street’ (Ratcliff 175). Pollock’s work returns the
attention to the “everyday”, to the familiar objects in the world. This idea of the familiar was not
wholly Pollock’s. “The argument had precedents. ‘Art should not be different from life but an act
within life,’ John Cage had declared at Black Mountain College” (Ratcliff 175).

53
The individual is forced to act within space, to redirect his attention to the familiar. In a
section entitled “Objects” in the Special View lecture, Olson weaves his ideas of history and the
body together. These two concepts are tied together on the very basis that “There is no limit to
what you can know. Or there is only in the sense that you don’t find out or you don’t seek to
know” (SVH 29). The challenge is to realize that this acquisition has to do with acting, with
doing, with seeking out the rest of what you don’t already know. History comes to play here:
I see history as the one way to restore the familiar to us—to stop treating us
cheap. Man is forever estranged to the degree that his stance toward reality
disengages him from the familiar. And it has been the immense task of the last
century and a half to get man back to what he knows. I repeat that phrase: to what
he knows. For it turns out to coincide exactly to that other phrase: to what he does.
What you do is precisely defined by what you know (SVH 29).
To get man back to what he knows he must act. The “familiar” returns man to the things that are
in his life everyday: the objects of reality that constitute that reality. “Which is the first way to
define the objective; that it is anything OUTSIDE of any one of us. This is knowable. Most of us
stop at the fact that it is experiencable” (SVH 30). What lies outside the body must be
experienced; the objective is that which the body must come into contact with something.
Beyond this point, beyond the very basis that it can be experienced, is the sense that it is
knowable, and that by experiencing it, we come to know it. Knowledge can then be used, and in
the case of Olson—it is put to use in poetry.
“Human Universe” directs attention to the internal body, not merely the objects around it:
“In other words, we are ourselves both the instrument of discovery and the instrument of
definition” (HU 53). Through the body, the individual in space is able to endure experience and
gain knowledge. “Human Universe”, more than any of Olson’s other poetic ruminations thus far,
collapses his idea of the body and language together the most successfully.

54
The body is the crux of inquiry for obtaining knowledge: it is the instrument that allows
the individual to experience the world. Olson argues that the body itself must be measured,
investigated, confronted. The body and language are intertwined: “Which is of course, why
language is a prime of the matter and why, if we are to see some of the laws afresh, it is
necessary to examine, first, the present condition of the language—and I mean language exactly
in its double sense of discrimination (logos) and of shout (tongue)” (HU 53). The present
condition of language for Olson is this: logos and tongue. This later bit, the “tongue” is what
Olson sees as that part of language that has been ignored, pulled to the wayside. The synecdoche
of the tongue for the idea of speech is powerful, for it exposes a desire to reunite speech with
language.
If the totality of the body is involved in the act of the poem, the poem itself bears an
imprint of the body that produced it. The measure of man is this constant oscillation between
consonance and dissonance, as Duncan says, a being in or out of tune with the poem and with the
body. There is a musicality that must be balanced, between word and body, and this is what
Olson is trying to articulate with his syllogism in the essay. The HEAD, by way of the EAR, gets
itself into the SYLLABLE. The HEART by way of the BREATH gets to the LINE. There is a
cyclical passage of energy from inside to outside: the head and heart are internal, the ear and the
breath are external. Finally, the output is within the poem itself: it bears imprint of both the
internal and external parts of the body.
At this point Olson’s argument about action in language is made the most clear: his
demand for language to re-subsume the body takes him to his next concern: how action can be
brought back into language. What has been “lost” in the medium is the focus of the essay, and
the body on all fronts serves as the ultimate antidote to the crisis of language as Olson sees it. A

55
return to what man knows, in this case the very vessel in which he must dwell, the flesh, allows
for greater understanding of his life. Later he writes: “In fact, by the very law of definition and
discovery, who can extricate language from action?” (Olson 54). The point Olson is trying to
make is important: the fact that the world is a landscape to be discovered, and as such, to be
defined, calls for a kind of action on behalf of the one that wishes to know. And the action must
occur in the present: “If there is any absolute, it is never more than this one, you, this instant, in
action” (HU 55).
Olson sets up this idea of action as a postulate for the rest of the argument. Above all
else, this sense that the body must act, may always undergo the possibility of action “ought to get
us on” (HU 55). It is what makes most acts “of living and of writing—unsatisfactory” (HU 55).
Action remains at the center of daily life and of writing. If these acts are not done, though, if they
are not undertaken, if they are not completed, what is the risk? Duncan’s suggestion that the
relationship between man and poetry is the fundamental liminality between being-in-tune or
being-out-of –tune is part of this demand to act. Olson’s need to “get us on” has to do with action
in life, not only in poetry. To be “out-of-tune” as Duncan suggests, is perhaps understood with
regards to Olson’s sense that if action does not occur, energy is used to its disadvantage.
Olson wishes to return to things—to the familiar objects in the world. The use of
comparison the simile gets the poet farther away from things as they actually are. To extrapolate
and describe a thing is to only give the object partial attention. Olson writes:
All that comparison ever does is set up a series of reference points: to compare is
to take one thing and try to understand it by marking its similarities to or
differences from another thing […] such analysis only accomplishes a
description, does not come to grips with what really matters: that a thing, any
thing, impinges on us by a more important fact, its self-existence, without
reference to any other thing, in short, the very character of it which calls our
attention to it, which wants us to know more about it, its particularity[…]the thing

56
itself, and its relevance to ourselves who are the experience of it (whatever it may
mean to someone else, or whatever other relations it may have) (HU, 56).
In the poem “Letter 27 [withheld]” Olson writes: “An American/ is a complex of occasions”
(MP, II.15,185). The essential fact that the American is concerned with space is related to this
idea that we are the “experience of the thing itself”. The individual pays attention to the things
within the space that are near, familiar.
This preoccupation with the body and action explains Olson’s affinity to Fenollosa and
his notes on the Chinese ideogram. The exactitude of these images allowed them to capture the
essence of the things they were meant to represent. The movement, the kinetics of the things that
men gave attention to, were solidified within the stone. The process of transcription apparently
operated as follows: man notices motion, a body moving, it gestures. The written equivalent of
that which man sees is chosen so as to capture the thing as it is, as it moves. Olson, like
Fenollosa, is interested in the image because it more impactfully demonstrates the relationship
between that person that performed the gesture and the one that witnessed the gesture.) The
image was the closest approximation to the interaction between the conscious body and that
which it saw. The visuality of the image more effectively and rapidly communicated meaning in
its pictorial soundness.
Though sight is only part of the sensorial apparatus. Olson extends the idea of perception
to include the entirety of the body. The process by which the body undergoes experience, takes
in information via the skin, for instance, has to do with Olson’s eventual premise that action must
occur in language. He begins with the flesh:
There is only one thing you can do about kinetic, reenact it. Which is why the
man said, he who possess rhythm possesses the universe. And why art is the only
twin life has—its only value metaphysic. Art does not seek to describe but to
enact. And if man is once more to possess intent in his life, to take up the
responsibility implicit in his life, he has to comprehend his own process as intact,

57
from outside, by way of his skin, in, and by his own powers of conversion, out
again. For there is this other part of the motion which we call life to be examined
anew, that thing we overlove, man’s action, that tremendous discharge of force
which we overlove when we love it for its own sake but which (when it is good)
is the equal of all intake plus all transposing (HU, 62-62).
Olson nears a more sound articulation of what the responsibility of a person is: how action of the
body has to do with some understanding of the human’s place in the world. Olson states that Art
does not seek to approximate, describe, nature, but to enact it. For the body in space, man comes
to comprehend his own physiology: he understands that he is separate from the environment in
which he lives, that is, his skin separates him from the exterior world. To possess meaning in
life, to take up this “responsibility”, he must understand his life as entirely whole. This
wholeness is preserved through the process by which man takes in the experience around him
and must, “by his own powers of conversion” understand his life as entirely whole. The motion
of the body involves a dual process: a taking in, and a release outwards. (Much like breathing,
which is the catalyst for all projective endeavors.) The “wholeness” of the body is constituted by
this reciprocity, this equilibrium of man’s inward and external dimensions. Olson’s insistence on
the “active” is the basis of man’s responsibility. Though there is a moment in the essay where
Olson suggests that this responsibility is also the site of man’s fall: “In other words, the
proposition here is that man at his peril breaks the full circuit of object, image, action at any
point. The meeting edge of man and the world is also his cutting edge” (HU 62). There is
serious risk, incredible pressure put on the individual to act, and if he does not, the equilibrium of
the internal and external does not remain intact. If man does not act, he does not accrue his
experiences inward, and thus he cannot guarantee his own output. Olson’s various ideas about
the body and experience pool together at this moment in the essay. He states that if man does not
treat all external reality as entirely relevant to his own inner life, he will use his energy

58
otherwise, in some other way. Olson is clear that man does influence external reality; he is part
of that reality. If man chooses to use his energy, his internal source of power, in some other way,
he will do so arbitrarily. This will cause him to affect nature in a negative way. He will use
himself “if he choose, to his disuse” (HU 62). Olson’s precautionary tone is one that cannot be
ignored because he acknowledges the principle relationship between the two siblings: art and
life, and the risk implied when man does not act.
It is clear that Olson insists on the active in man. To remain inert, to not fully engage
with external reality, with the objects that constitute that reality, to fail to use the body: these are
the causes of an inactive stance towards reality. It is an insufficient way of living. Action is the
only way that energy may be used.
The idea of the active, willful subject within space is the basis of A Special View of
History. In “History, A Definition” Olson starts to blend some of the ideas from the other essays
in this lecture: “(Only thus, by the way, can one say mortal—not as a ‘lifetime’, not as flesh
going toward death and resurrection but as history: that you live. An active. The dynamic is, not
the energy exploded, wasted, used, whatever is done with it. But that it is there, to be used”
(SVH, 17). History is the fact that the human is living. Olson insists that history is not the
account of the energy that what was “exploded, wasted, used”, all of which have occurred in the
past, but that it is a confrontation with energy that “can be used”. At the end of this section on
history Olson states: “A function is how a thing acts. There is a natural proper or characteristic
action of anything. That is its function. As of a human life I say it is its history. It is the how.
There can be no other” (SVH, 18).
The “how” of action has yet to be defined, it is perhaps in Olson’s poetry that this way of
acting may reveal itself. Olson repeatedly insists on a call to action in these essays. From that

59
position, where man accepts responsibility and so chooses to act on it: his stance towards reality
is revealed.
We learn from Olson that there are always two given stances that man may take at any
time. The question “What did happen?” (SVH, 20) is something man asks himself and thus there
are two alternatives: “make it up, or try to find out, both are necessary. We inherit an either-or,
from the split of science and fiction” (SVH, 20). This complicates Olson’s original idea of
history. Olson means to say that history is another kind of story. It is not only what is happening
now, the function of a human life, but what happened ago, even if it occurred just seconds before
the present moment. So, there are two stances that Olson posits. The first is to make it up, the
second, to find out.
In order to know what happened man must tell the story. Story is logos: it is both word
and mouth. Though this later part, this idea that story was also orally told, makes story also
Muthos (SVH, 20). “What it all comes to is this, that to those who listened to the Stories a
Muthos was a Logos, and a Logos was a Muthos. They were two names for the same thing”
(SVH, 20). So, history is both fact and fiction, or man decides if it is either of the two. What
Olson emphasizes is an idea he inherits from a book by Herodotus. Olson paraphrases: “ ‘istorin
in him appears to mean ‘finding out for oneself,’ instead of depending on hearsay. The word had
already been used by the philosophers. ‘But while they were looking for truth, Herodotus is
looking for the evidence’” (SVH, 20). A bit of elaboration is needed here to understand Olson’s
line of thought. The stance man takes is the decision: to find out what happened, or to make up
what happened. Olson regards Herodotus as both a mythologist and a poet, he practiced “muthologos” or “the practice of life as story” (SVH 20).

60
What kind of truth is being suggested by the pursuit of the story alongside the idea of
history as something that actually happened? And how, through poetry, does Olson achieve this?
Again, the how has yet to be done: the possibility of action, of finding out for oneself is clear, but
the execution of that desire has not been described. On the week of March 275h, 1968 Olson gave
a series of lectures at Beloit College collectively entitled: “Poetry and Truth”. On Wednesday,
March 27th, Olson elaborated on this idea of action and on this idea coined by Herodotus: the
‘istorin that apparently each individual must endure:
In other words, if you stop to think of yourself as an impediment of creation, I
mean you…I think you follow me, that the unknown is rather your self’s insides.
And I suddenly was talking to these two men on the basis of the fact that that’s
exactly the whole meaning: that we become sure in the dark, that we move
wherever we wish in the six directions with that light[…]I mean, literally, that to
light that dark is to have come to whatever it is I think any of us seeks” (SVH 44).
What is the demand that Olson is putting on the poet? In a letter to Cid Corman, the editor of a
magazine called Origin in Boston, Massachusetts, Olson writes:
that THE DEMAND
ON YOU, CID CORMAN, is, to accomplish each issue—to see it, always,
clearly, exhaustively, as—A
FIELD OF FORCE
that is, that, as agent of this collective (which ORIGIN is going to be)
the question is larger than, yr taste, alone: it is the same sort of
confrontation as—in any given poem—a man faces: how much energy
he has got in, to make the thing stand on its own feet as, a force, in,
the fields of force which surround everyone of us, of which we, too,
are forces: to stand FORTH (Olson 50).5
Everything that man has at his disposal is used to make the poem stand on its feet, to make it
live. So too, though, Olson calls for a kind of presence on behalf of people. To fine-tune their
attention to such a precise degree that life itself is only a process of coming to know, and never

5

Letters for Origin

61
knowing. Olson is calling for a kind of gesture in art, in politics, and in life that has considerable
repercussions. If these demands are not met, energy is wasted. If energy is wasted, if it is not
harnessed in some way, if this tipping scale as Duncan shows us, is completely out of tune, man
does not live up to his potential. Man does not live in his present if he uses energy to his disuse.
To live in the present, to live in what is happening, is to engage with life through precise
attention alone.
Olson’s essays are the essential underpinnings of his poetry; they provide useful
information that may aid the apprehensive reader. It would be a mistake to say that gesture was
only Olson’s doing. The gesture bears the evidence of an American concern for space and the
need to encounter it. Gesture is the action Olson performs and this action is done in language. In
the essay “The Present is Prologue” Olson reveals his own active position, his own responsibility
to poetry: “[…] I find it awkward to call myself a poet or a writer. If there are no walls there are
no names. This is the morning, after the dispersion, and the work of morning is methodology:
how to use oneself, and on what. That is my profession. I am an archeologist of morning” (206207). As an evidence seeker he acts in the midst of the dark, turning towards the day.

62
Movement (
In theory, Olson suggests that the body is inextricable from the process of writing. This is
his most basic idea, but it is one that the reader may not understand with regards to the poetry
itself.
Is Olson suggesting a sort of improvisation within writing?
Olson insists on an acute degree of attention on behalf of his reader, a kind of
unrelenting pursuit of the present moment, of the objects in the poem and the way they move in
relation to one another. Such is the arduous task that the reader must endure, for he cannot look
outside of what is already inside the poem itself. Is this also true of the poet, who must pay
attention to the demands of the energy of his body. It is at this same moment that the poem is
created.
There is clearly a difference between what the body can do, and what words are capable
of. Both act, yes, but in different ways. And perhaps this is a matter of the degree of force each of
them exerts. The body exerts a force through presence, movement. Olson wants language to do
the same thing, to demand attention the same way the body does, the way things do.

63

Words then are naming and logography is writing as though each word is physical
and that objects are originally motivating. This is the doctrine of the earth.
--Charles Olson
from
“The Advantage of Literacy Is That Words Can Be on the Page: A
Bibliography on the State of Knowledge for Charles Doria”

64

II. Gesture

The Maximus Poems are a dense collection; the reader unfamiliar with Olson’s work may
find them so formally experimental and densely allusive that it becomes hard to concentrate and
attend to what is happening in the language. The series of poems constitute a world within
themselves. Olson explores the scope of American history through the eyes of one Maximus of
Tyre within the mythic city of Gloucester, Massachusetts. With a painstaking attention to the
specificity of his place, Olson provides details of the particular houses on each street, makes
maps with words of the geography of the space, and catalogues the names of the early settlers on
the shore. Coupled with this attention to what he sees in Gloucester, Olson mines what he reads.6
His own experience and the particular details of his life also find their way into the poems: from
his relationship to the poet Vincent Ferrini, to early memories of his childhood (that time before
he knew the meaning of the word “tansy”), to the leaky sink in his house. He places the
fishermen at work in their boats off-shore, takes issue with the habits of newsprint and
advertising, details the vegetation life of the sea town, looks closely at rocks: reads the rocks.
The lone reader must confront the space of the poem the way the body interacts with the
space of the world: attention to details, objects, and movement are necessary. he ideas set into
motion in “Projective Verse” all call for a change in how verse is written. The poetics that Olson
6

Alfred North Whitehead and Herman Melville’s conceptualizations of space and reality appear
repeatedly for instance.

65
suggests is one that puts language into action. This is achieved through the special relationship
between body and language, between the poet and the syllables and lines that eventually give
shape to the form of the poem. It is important to remember, too, that the poem as Olson saw it
was “a high energy construct”, the medium through which energy is transferred. The focus of
this chapter is not merely to apply Olson’s poetics to his poetry. An awareness of his insistence
on the body, language, the “active”, and this evolving term “gesture” is necessary in order to
study Olson’s words, syntax, grammar. While journeying through the entirety of Maximus it
becomes clear that Olson is experimenting with the ideas in “Projective Verse” to extreme
degrees, so as to challenge the idea of poetry as process, and with it, the form of composition on
a blank page. By the time he reaches “Cole’s Island” in Volume III, there are stanzas that stand
alone on a single page: lines intersect each other to create a visual image of two phrases that
appear to be occurring simultaneously:

(MP, III. 110, 438)

66
Visually the stanza stands out next to the earlier poems that are formally experimental in their
own right, but they span the page in various horizontal configurations. Here Olson presents two
phrases that collide: the first: “afterwards, in between, and since” the second: “My shore, my
sounds, my earth, my place”. It appears that the word “between” has cut off “my place” from the
first part of the sentence.
The Maximus Poems are divided into three volumes and composed of five parts. Formally
the poems are “postmodern” in their scope. Not merely a historical term used to distinguish the
art after World War II, the idea conceptualizes a new kind of energy in American culture. The
“postmodern” is a word that is often used to describe Olson’s project in particular. In a letter to
Robert Creeley in 1951, Olson describes what this means, and simultaneously castes the whole
category aside:
my assumption is any POST-MODERN is born
with the ancient confidence that, he does belong.
So, there is nothing to be found. There is only (as
Shoenberg had it, his Harmony) search) tho, I should wish to
kill that word, too—there is only examination (Alcalay 67)
The postmodern, despite whether Olson considers it a useful idea or not, necessitates the human
being in the universe, its presence. This sense of belonging is applicable to Duncan’s ideas in
“Towards an Open Universe”. Meaning, according to Duncan, is already within what exists. This
includes the human, as part of the world it lives in. There is “nothing to be found” because it is
already there. The objective of the postmodern is examination, attention, and exploration, of
what is. The task is to do something with what is already there: to act among and towards objects
that are present. The body must act in response to what is already in front of it, what constitutes
its reality. This is Olson’s project specifically: it is the seeking out of knowledge and the
transmission of it.

67
Olson’s “Projective Verse” essay is itself a manifesto of this kind of perspective. The
critic and scholar George Butterick for instance takes up Olson’s postmodern sensibility and
describes it in relation to what Olson says about the difference between “the act of the instant”
rather than the “thought about the instant” as he discusses in “Human Universe”. What this kind
of action looks like in language itself, in Olson’s poetry, is complex: “In an effort to break free,
post-modern poetry requires almost a total and systematic disordering or disorientation—not so
much of the senses, as Rimbaud proposed—but of syntax, at the same time accompanied by a
demand for a re-orientation to a new, a ‘human universe’ (Butterick 5). 7 The post-modern in this
case involves the acute attention on behalf of the reader. As Olson and Duncan suggest, the poem
itself tries to put objects in relation to one another the way things in the universe do. Therefore, if
attention to things in the world is what Olson wants for the individual, an attention to things
happening in language is also what he demands on behalf of his reader.
This demand for attention on behalf of the reader and poet alike is related to Olson’s use
of the term ‘istorin. This mantra of discovery puts the poet, the human, back into the framework
of the universe, rather than being estranged from it (Butterick 7). This sense that more is required
on behalf of the reader is such is absolutely true; he must pay attention to things in the poems,
look closely at the solids in the poem, the things that are set into motion. The reader acts on a
‘istorin throughout Maximus and makes it his business to unearth what’s there.
The position of the poet, however, has to do with gesture, this aforementioned term that
has yet to solidify conceptually. In a letter to Cid Corman on May 8, 1951 Olson writes:
That is (written) dance as it is definitely the graphic
of drama (mime, as only the broader aspect of
7

Charles Olson and the Postmodern Advance

68
gesture &, motion
(voice (verse) as working against, & out
of, such, under motion---- dance as
motion around language
(Origin 53).
What becomes immediately clear here is Olson’s concern for the image, for the visual aspect of
dance aside and the visible quality of writing. Black text taking up space on the page in this case.
“Written dance” in this case is a language that moves, it is a visible imprint of the movement it
came from. Mime, gesture, and motion are all terms that apply to performance, to the body
moving in space. Olson here applies them to language. So too, verse is equated with the voice,
speech. Speech works against and out of motion. Dance does not do this. Dance is the motion
around language. Language comes from within motion, it is later the outward gesture made in
graphic form. How these theories come to bear on the poetry themselves is difficult to determine.
However great the task is of paying attention to what happens in the poems themselves, it is the
only way to know what is going on, what is happening in language.
Both the gesture and the postmodern are applicable to Olson. Derek Bailey’s book
Improvisation: It’s Nature and Practice in Music makes reference to Pollock’s process in
conjunction with the work of prominent jazz improvisers. American composer Earle Brown says
to Bailey in an interview:
I had also come up as a jazz musician—and also the influence of Alexander
Calder and Jackson Pollock’s paintings…Jackson was sort of a wild guy and he
was a very brilliant man and felt this kind of intensity in his own spontaneity and
it occurred to me that Jackson was almost performing his paintings—and so all of
these things came together in 1951 and ’52 for me […] (Bailey 62).
The idea of improvisation in the musical and visual art contexts as it relates to the body could
perhaps be applied, explored in some sense, in Olson’s writing of The Maximus Poems in some
way. The “gesture” in Pollock’s work, the gestures in improvised jazz composition, operate in

69
their own ways. In order to explore the kind of gestural imprint that appears in Olson’s work,
though, a more complex conceptualization of the movement of the body needs to be explored.
What is the different between the force of gesture as opposed to the force of language? This is
where Olson fits in the language discourse discussed earlier through the work of J.L. Austin.
What kind of force does the language transmit? Is it a kind of force that derives its electricity
from the body?
Poet and scholar Ammiel Alcalay offers a reassuring message in his book A Little
History: “It is helpful to read The Maximus Poems” in light of the fact that work worth doing
always entails risk” (Alcalay 105). As the reader in this case, it will require a kind of attention to
the realities and the movements of the poems themselves.
The epigraph to the poet Robert Creeley are the first words we see in the collection: “for
Robert Creeley—the figure of outward” (MP, 4). Below it are the words “All my life I’ve heard/
one makes many” (MP,4). The short epithet “Figure of Outward” was apparently something
Olson got from a dream he had at Black Mountain (Butterick 3). Olson’s notes on the dream
from May 1969 explain that this turn of phrase meant a kind of return to the world, he writes
“way out way out there:” (Butterick 3). Creeley apparently had rejected Olson’s poems for
publication in a magazine in New Hampshire. Creeley wrote to Vincent Ferinni, a mutual friend
of the two, and said that “Olson was looking around for a language, and the result is a loss of
force” (Butterick 3). The story behind the epithet suggests a kind of defensiveness on behalf of
Olson. The Maximus Poems begin with this address, a reference to the disagreement between the
two friends. Olson recycles the term, and whether we know the context of the anecdote or not,
we understand that “The Figure of Outward” has to do with shape and movement: the form of
the thing coming into being. The epigraph reveals a new idea: “All my life I’ve heard/ one makes

70
many” (MP). It calls to mind the relationship between the singular and the collective. Olson’s
“Human Universe” comes to mind here, for he means to suggest that the singular is part of the
collective, the collective is comprised of individuals. In some notes on the poems he calls this
premise: “the dominating paradox on which Max complete out to stand” (Butterick 5). This sense
of the one in the many, the many as a group of individuals, the sense that the poems do intend to
search for a kind of language imbued with force, with a direction towards life, towards things,
outwards, is the underlying principle that Olson is trying to achieve with his projective outlook.
The first poem is called “I, Maximus of Gloucester, to You”. From the title it is clear that
the poem is some kind of first person address from Maximus to an unnamed recipient “You”. He
addresses the whole of Gloucester: it’s geography, history, people, rocks. In 1961 Olson writes
that he used Maximus as the vehicular momentum to get the poem going to test this idea that the
single human being is powerful: “the advantage of the single human figure” (Butterick 8). The
single human figure addresses himself to the whole, turns himself towards the world in which he
lives. And the poem begins:
Off-shore, by islands hidden by the blood
Jewels & miracles, I, Maximus
a metal hot from boiling water, tell you
what is a lance, who obeys the figures of
the present dance
(MP, I. I, 5)
Maximus: a metal. Maximus: the person who addresses himself to the place in which he stands.
The metal that has come “from” some aquatic origin. “I, Maximus/ a metal”: the metal denotes
the body, the individual, the “single human figure”. The metal inside Maximus is not of the
mind, it is of the body: Maximus himself is the metal. In the essay “Place; & Names” Olson
writes: “the crucialness being that these places or names/ be as parts of the body, common &
capable/ therefore of having cells which can decant/ total experience” (Collected Writings 200).

71
Place is important to the body, to the individual. “Islands hidden by the blood” signifies the
relationship between place and geography, as they exist within the body itself. Later “who obeys
the figures of/the present dance”. He is insisting on the present moment, a movement that is
already happening. The present dance is what the poem comes out of. The figures of the present
dance are not only bodies moving, dancing, but language, verse bearing the imprint of the body
that it came out of. In the next stanza the movement that Olson is trying to get onto picks up
momentum:
1
the thing you’re after
may lie around the bend
of the nest (second, time slain, the bird! the bird!
And there! (strong) thrust, the mast! flight
of the bird
o kylix, o
Antony of Padua
sweep low, o bless
the roofs, the old ones, the gentle steep ones
on whose ridge-poles the gulls sit, from which they depart,
And the flake-racks
of my city!
(MP, I.I,5)
Whatever is being sought after “may lie around the bend”. This suggests that movement is
continuous, the the person looking is moving towards something, but it is just shy of their line of
sight. As a reader of the poem a series of questions arise with each line: “the thing you’re after”
(after what?), may lie around the bend (the bend of where?). The third line is dictated completely
by the motion that is happening around it, time quickens, and suddenly an object comes into
view: a bird.

Considerable force is felt, the parenthetical makes this known: “And there!

(strong)”. As soon as the mast of a ship appears, it is likened to the flight of the bird. There is a

72
noticeable change in the cadence of the following stanza. The almost elegiac address of the bird,
the repetition of the “o” as it’s own word and as the sounds imbedded within “Antony” and
“low” stitch together an altogether different rhythm than the preceding lines. The movement of
the next two lines is dictated by the comma splices, there is a lurching towards something.
Finally the “flake-racks” which are “of my city!”. There is an attention here not only to
movement but to distinct objects: the mast of the boat, the birds, the roofs of each house on
which the birds sit, then take flight, the force of the flight is akin to the force of the mast of the
boat, the boat is as significant as the gull, the flake-racks. “What you’re after” is everything that
constitutes the reality “of my city”. The next stanza considers matter, objects again:
2
love is form, and cannot be without
important substance (the weight
say, 58 carats each one of us, perforce
our goldsmith’s scale
feather to feather added
(and what is mineral, what
is curling hair, the string
you carry in your nervous beak, these
make bulk, these, in the end, are
the sum

(o my lady of good voyage
in whose arm, whose left arm rests
no boy but a carefully carved wood, a painted face, a schooner!
a delicate mast, as bow-spirit for
forwarding
(MP, I.2, 6)
The lines introduce the idea of love as that which contains matter, physical material. “Important
substance” is the body: “the weight/ say, 58 carats each one of us, perforce/” allots a specific,

73
“important”, numerical value to the presence of each one of the figures that are present on the
field. The next stanza is an off-shoot of the first; Olson begins to compile various important
substances, adding them up, tallying them into the field that is growing. Each thing, each
material, “makes bulk”. The poet begins to fill in the field, constituting it with real matter, real
things that accumulate to form “the sum”. The “you” is part of this equation: “the string/you
carry in your nervous beak”. The “you” could be a bird. The “you” could be anything in this
amalgamation of material, this reverence for anything with “important substance”, with a
presence of any kind. This attention to detail is once again interrupted by the incoming presence
of a ship. The physical description of the boat’s “important substance” is then filtered into the
words “for/forwarding”. Here the stanza ends, the boat continues forward, regarded for both its
physical importance and it’s pulling of the field “forward”.
It is clear that the language is enacting movement on the page: the possibility of
something out of sight beyond the bend pulls the stanza forward quickly, reorients the reader in
another place. The bird flies away to some unknown location; the reader is affected by the force
of the take-off, the direction of flight. At the end of the stanza, the progressive verb pulls the
poem forward.
Perhaps to understand where the action of the body comes to bear on the poetry is to
understand Olson’s sense of grammar, how he reconfigures the structural components of his
verse so as to access a wholly different energy, one that originates in the body. Michael Boughn
assesses Olson’s sense of the “literary” in 1963, when Olson arrived in Buffalo for a teaching
position:
The literary, then, as an institution, as institutionalized practices. Crucial to
Olson’s sense of a move beyond or around the literary is his notion that it’s
possible to reconnect with or recover energies that pre-exist their historical
institutionalization into a specific, fixed grammar of social practices. And even

74
more importantly, that to do that, to push one’s self toward that connection, is to
disrupt or alter that grammar, a profoundly political act (Alcalay 142).
The action that Olson is himself undertaking is not solely physical. In order to enact some kind
of action in the present moment, there is a serious consideration not only of what is apparent in
the now, but what was. Olson’s action, gesture, in the present is made with a regard for the past,
with a sense that in order to move forward, a reconnection with energy of what came before is
necessary. Condillac and Rousseau are concerned with a kind of originary language that was
necessitated by the gesture, by the body that could communicate needs through the body alone.
Olson is himself searching for a way to communicate through a return to origin, and perhaps that
origin is itself within the gesture. To “push oneself toward that connection,” to uptake the
‘istorin, to find out for oneself, is to act on this dualism: to look back to the past in order to then
move forward. To move forward is so too a disruption of the past: a political gesture.
The gesture that Olson makes in his poetry and in his stance, in his life, is one that is
necessitated by the body, and it is one that bears considerable social and political consequences.
So too the action of the gesture bears a kind of force in a variety of ways: on the level of
grammar, through the movement of the body, and finally through political means. Poet and
Olson scholar André Spears writes:
As an ‘archeologist of morning,’ Olson is positioned to bring to his poetry the
globalism and ‘post-modernism’ of a Pleistocene perspective on history, from
which he looks as far back as the discovery of fire an the invention of language to
relocate humanity in the present (Alcalay 101).
As one in search of the facts, of the things that exist, are present, Olson takes it upon himself to
look back, to look explicitly at what already happened.. As he writes in the first letter to
Gloucester: “facts, to be dealt with, as the sea is, the demand” (MP: I.2, 6)

75
The origin of things is what Olson looks at. In the fourth part of Maximus’ address to
Gloucester gesture operates in a few ways:
4
one loves only form,
and form only comes
into existence when
the thing is born
born of yourself, born
of hay and cotton struts,
of street-pickings, wharves, weeds
you carry in, my bird
of a bone of a fish
of a straw, or will
of a color, of a bell
of yourself, torn
(MP: I.3, 7)
Spatially the stanzas increasingly move to the right, away from the original. They appear as
quickly as separate instances in time, one after the next. The word “of”, however, links the three
pieces together. Despite the “forwarding” of the language to the East, the language continually
references what came before. It begins: “one loves only form”: this is contingent on the
subsequent lines: “form comes/into existence when/ the thing is born”. No form exists when
there is no thing.
The next stanza expands on the presence of the thing, which, if we recycle Heidegger’s
idea: the thing is where the word is. The notion of place, the “where” of something, is where the
action is happening. Olson repetitively uses the word in the third part of the letter: “when even
you”; “when, on the hill, over the water”; “where she who used to sing”; “when the water
glowed” (I.4). These lines come before this 4th section that is devoted to the idea of form and
origin. Heidegger’s idea: “No thing is where the word is lacking” is operating here. Maximus
continues in 4: “born of yourself, born/ of hay and cotton struts”. The poem sets up an

76
increasingly complex level of origin here: born of oneself, born of “hay” and “cotton struts,/ of
street-pickings, wharves, weeds/ you carry in, my bird”. The final stanza makes use of the word
to intensify the relationship of origin further: each “of” contains another “of”: “of a bone of a
fish”: the preposition brings the form close to the internal. That same body of the fish has an
origin: “of a straw, or will”. The line “of a straw, or will” is hard to decipher, though read inflow with the next line, we get another reading: “of a straw, or will/of a color, of a bell/ of
yourself, torn”. The function of the preposition here sets up a complicated succession that
performs the relationship of form and content: “of a bell of yourself”; “or will of a color” are all
approximations of the form of the “thing”, which, inevitably at the end is “torn”. Olson makes
use of the word, the preposition, as a means of describing the relationship between thing and that
which it signifies. Though the word “of” joins things, here the poem amalgamates the
relationship of form and thing until finally it is revealed to be “torn”.
The preposition allows for the gesture to be performed in this distinct moment. The
grammar in this case simulates the approximation of something, the desire to get to the root of
the origin of things, the need to communicate the very bare bones of the thing. In this case the
thing is comprised of many layers and shells of other things. In order to love form, one has to
love the thing that is born, and that is itself comprised of many things. In order to revere the
thing, the action of going back, of trying to understand what came before it, must be done.
However, what Olson is simultaneously able to do by returning to the past, is the paradoxical
forwarding that is happening in the motion of the language itself, on the field of the page, as it
moves from left to right with each stanza. The boat is moving forward just as the preposition is
incessantly pulling the reader’s attention back to something that existed before. This dualism
between what came before and what must occur now creates tension. The FORCE that the reader

77
experiences is this overwhelming sense that in order to move forward, one must also look back.
The poetics of action is dictated by the force of gesture: this intense codependence between the
past and present, between the body then, and the body now, between what already happened, and
what will happen.
The sixth part of the letter is the culmination of the building of all elements of the field
thus far: the bird, the mast, the sense of hearing, and the sum of all “important material”. The
word “in” is used with particular force:
in! in! the bow-sprit, bird, the beak
in, the bend is, in, goes in, the form
that which you make, what holds, which is
the law of object, strut after strut, what you are, what you must be, what
the force can throw up, can, right now and hereinafter erect,
the mast, the mast, the tender
mast!
(MP, I.4,8)
The use of the preposition as exclamatory statements at the beginning of the stanza immediately
imbues the word with force, and it is obvious that the word is acting, though it is difficult to
determine how. At the beginning of the phrase the word is repeated twice: “in! in!”, two
successive actions that pull, staccato, the language somewhere. There is an obvious contrast
between the quick beat of “in! in!” and the lull, the gradual “forwarding” that Olson begins with.
The preposition tells us that the direction is changing, but “where” this pathway is going is still
uncertain. The next line echoes the words in 4: “in, the bend is, in, goes in, the form”. It is
difficult to splice the phrases, the commas here perform the act of “bending”: at every comma
the line curves towards the idea of the preposition: in. This phenomenon is repeated throughout
the rest of the stanza. The command “in!”, though it was imbued with considerable force at the
beginning of the stanza, is fully realized as an action through Olson’s use of the comma in these

78
lines. Again, the question of “where” the language is moving is uncertain, but through the
process of reading the lines, and noticing the persistence of the comma, it is made consistently
clear that the direction means nothing more than what it is: “in”. Its meaning is its direction. The
line performs the preposition’s action. There’s a final turn in the last few lines: “the force can
throw up, can, right now and hereinafter erect”. “Hereinafter” means in this case “beginning
now” Notice the same “in” between the brackets “here” and after”. So, the word now has its
place between the other two. The lines bend in towards some unknown destination. Through the
process of reading the reader pursues the direction of the line, understand the action of “in” as
one that is continually curving towards some location, until finally, the same “force” that was felt
in the two exclamations at the beginning then funnels the lines into the phrase “hereinafter
erect”. At this point the word “in” is not used again. It resides between “here and “after”. The
force now has taken control of “the mast, the mast, the tender/mast!”. At the end of his letter
Maximus concludes:
The nest, I say, to you, I Maximus, say
under the hand, as I see it, over the waters
from this place where I am, where I hear
can still hear
from where I carry you a feather
as though, sharp, I picked up,
in the afternoon delivered you
a jewel,
it flashing more than a wing,
than any old romantic thing,
than memory, than place,
than anything other than that which you carry
than that which is,
call it a nest, around the head of, call it
the next second
than that which you
can do!
(MP, I. 4, 8)

79
The end of the letter makes reference to the very beginning of the address. Maximus names
himself as separate from the “you” again: “I say, to you, I Maximus, say”. The relationship
between I and You relies on the letter. Later in the fourth part of “Letter 5” the same
preoccupation with naming reappears: “(I am not named Maximus/ for no cause” (I. 20). An
attention to naming, to pointing something out, ends the second letter: “than that which is,/ call it
a nest, around the head of, call it/ the next second/ than that which you/ can do!”. “That which is”
must be named, “called” something, and noticed. In “Tyrian Businesses” this process is
reinvoked: “There may be no more names than there are objects/ There can be no more verbs
than there are actions” (I. 36). The job is stated in “Letter 7”: “(As hands are put to the eyes’
commands” (I. 32). Eyes that notice, hands that point to things. A gesture of the body is done. To
see and then to point is the responsibility. Indeed there are no more names than there are objects
that already exist; there are no more verbs than there are actions.
The project of naming things, of recognizing objects and assigning them meaning, is
related to the function of nouns. Nouns call attention to themselves in the poetry. Fenellosa will
be helpful in this case: “A true noun, an isolated thing, does not exist in nature. Things are only
terminal points, or rather the meeting points, of actions, cross-sections cut through actions, snapshots” (Fenollosa 17).
“Tansy” in the O.E.D. is defined as the following: “1. An erect herbaceous plant,
Tanacetum vulgare, N.O. Compositæ, tribe Corymbiferæ, growing about two feet high, with
deeply cut and divided leaves, and terminal corymbs of yellow rayless button-like flowers; all
parts of the plant have a strong aromatic scent and bitter taste” (O.E.D. Online). Olson describes
the herb to Donald Allen on July 22, 1963: “It doesn’t grow anymore at the same place but that is
due to more efficient mowers, and the desire (like blacktop) to have anything smooth and of one

80
sort or character. We therefore celebrate TANSY MORE THAN BEFORE” (Butterick 23).
Olson’s manipulates the word in “Letter 3”, and a closer consideration of it will yield a greater
understanding of how the word acts within the poem. The letter begins:
Tansy buttons, tansy
for my city
Tansy for their noses
Tansy for them,
tansy for Gloucester to take the smell
of all owners,
the smell
Tansy
for all of us
(MP, I. 9,13)
The word functions as scent in the first part of the poem. It bears considerable weight. The smell
is “for” another thing: “tansy/for my city”; “Tansy for their noses”; “Tansy for them,/ tansy for
Gloucester to take the smell/ of all owners,/ the smell”. The scent is what is important here, and
this quality is then distributed. The next stanza expands on the previous one, it is set in on the
page slightly to the right of the first three stanzas. Here the concept of the word opens up:
Let those who use words cheap, who use us cheap
take themselves out of the way
Let them not talk of what is good for the city
(MP, I. 9,13)
The exploitation of the word is here equated with the manipulation of bodies, the “us” of the city.
A sense of moral responsibility is being formulated, and this outlook is based solely on the way
in which language is used in the city; the way words are used. The final stanza on the page uses
the word again:
Tansy from Cressy’s
I rolled in as a boy
and didn’t know it was
tansy
(MP, I.9, 13)

81
Tansy from Cressy’s. The flower is given a distinct origin; Cressy’s is a beach located on
Freshwater Cove in Gloucester (Butterick 23). The word “tansy’ encapsulates Maximus’
particular experience with it as a child. Later: “runs with summer with/ tansy” and “o tansy city,
root city/ let them not make you/ as the nation is” and then finally: “

Root person in root

place, hear one tansy-covered boy tell you/ what any knowing man of your city might; a letter
carrier, say,” (I.11,12.13). How is it the noun is functioning in these lines? Yes, tansy is denoting
a particular herb, of a particular origin, and so too, it is describing the boy’s experience with the
object before knowing what it’s proper name was. This idea of the noun operating between
things comes across in the poetry. In the last case, for instance. The tansy-covered boy
communicates the same way that a letter carrier does: he passes information between two people.
This idea of the noun as “between” is later performed by the succession of hyphenated words in
the subsequent lines: “the condition of the under-water, the cut-water of anyone, including
those/who take on themselves/ to give you advice,” (I. 12). The entire letter concludes with a
familiar relationship:
Isolated person in Gloucester, Massachusetts, I, Maximus, address you
Islands
Of men and girls
(MP, I.12,16)

The herb apparently grows on a particular beach in this city. Though by the end of the poem, it is
understood that the presence of tansy is so too indicative of experience, communication between
people, the whole passage of time “in this rare place” (I.11). The word is complicated: “only a
man or a girl who hear a word/ and that word meant not a single thing the least more than/ what
it does mean” (I. 11). What does the word tansy mean, though? It is not as Olson says “strong
(like goldenrod) and smells almost offensive with a pineapple odor” (Butterick 22). The word

82
opens up the relationship between “I” and “you” once again. The individual sees the flower in its
uniqueness, like the isolated person.
“The Songs of Maximus” depart from the original structure of the poems. No longer does
Olson use the format of the address or the letter. The last lines of “Song 3” have a striking
cadence, and the body is implicated here in a few ways:
“In the midst of plenty, walk
as close to
bare
In the face of sweetness,
Piss
In the time of goodness,
go side, go
smashing, beat them, go as
(as near as you can
tear
In the land of plenty, have nothing to do with it
take the way of
the lowest,
including
your legs, go
contrary, go
sing
(MP, I.14, 18)
The first line references a sixteenth century English lyric from Gammer Gurton’s Needle (by a
man named John Sill) which begins with the first few lines: “Back and side go bare, go bare, /
both foot and hand go cold…” (Butterick 28). Olson here specifies what the command “go”
means: to walk. The lines build in energy, in impact, until the final one: “(as near as you can”.
The reader may ask: can what? The next line: tear. The following lines recycle the original ones:
the poem almost begins again, a reprise of the original verse, but it has been modified: “In the

83
land of plenty, have nothing to do with it” it begins. Olson shifts the attention to geography: the
land. In the land of plenty, in the midst of things: “take the way of/ the lowest, including/ your
legs, go contrary, go/ sing”. The last few lines are not “torn”, disrupted by some other external
force. Here the poet offers some other kind of remedy for living in the midst of much: to walk, to
sing.
Olson and his father before him were letter carriers in Gloucester. In The Post Office,
Olson writes about his father’s walking route:
For years my father had the route he wanted […] Just to cross the bridge a winter
morning and a winter afternoon, or to be a part of the boating around it in the
summer and the fall, gave his work day a freedom he could never have known in
any other route in the city. The whole route has this quality (Olson 38).
There is a wonderful connection here between Olson’s description of the carrier on foot and what
Henry David Thoreau’s says in the essay “Walking”: “When I go out of the house for a walk,
uncertain as yet whither I will bend my steps, and submit myself to my instinct to decide for me”
(Thoreau 254). Olson, in line with Thoreau, is positing a kind of action in the simplicity of the
movement of the body, and the movement of the body in the present moment of things: “in the
midst of plenty”. Thoreau says towards the end of the essay: “Above all, we cannot afford not to
live in the present” (Thoreau 254). In Volume II of Maximus there is a distinct moment where
the mail carrier traces his steps on the way to the person he will deliver the mail to:
up the steps, along the porch
turning the corner
if the L,
to go in the door
and face the ladies
sitting in the comfortable

84
chairs,
and greet Simp
with the morning’s mail
(MP, II.96, 266)
The present tense pulls the reader’s attention towards what is happening and hones in on the
interaction between the mail carrier and “Simp”, who will receive a letter from him. So too, all of
the commands in “Song 3” are in the present tense: go, walk, sing. The demand that Olson has
on the individual is to “walk” so to speak, to act in the present moment: to engage in the now.
This is central to this idea of the pragmatic quest for knowledge in experience: a gnosis through
movement. “Song 6” is short:
you sing, you
who also
wants
(MP, I. 16, 20)

Through the doing of some action, desire is directed at the end of that completed task. To walk,
to sing, to move: these are all actions that function on the basis of some inner corporeal drive to
complete that task, to learn from it.
This knowledge is acquired through the body, and it is a process that Olson uses to
critique the Cartesian apparatus that Locke and Hume argue for. In “Letter 5” Maximus
addresses Ferrini:
The mind, Ferrini,
is as much of a labor
as to lift an arm
flawlessly
Or to read sand in the butter on the end of a lead,
and be precise about what sort of bottom your vessel’s over
(MP, I.23, 27)

85
To lift an arm flawlessly suggests that there is risk in the performance of that action. It requires
precision: like knowing the specific body of water the boat is floating on. Attention in the
particularity requires thought yes, and precision of action: acute attention to movement, gaining
knowledge through doing.
“Letter 6” picks up on this central notion that attention is necessary for Olson, and it is
essential in a political sense. Guy Davenport writes in his essay “Olson” that the poet focuses his
energy on precision and noticing: “Knowledge to Olson was a compassionate acquisition, an act
of faith and sympathy. He meant primarily that knowledge is the harvest of attention, and he
fumed in great rages that the hucksters prey on our attention like a plague of tricks” (Davenport
82). At the beginning of the letter there are two short lines:
polis is
eyes
(MP, I. 28, 32)
The social arena is constituted by people; people who see. But it is more than this: it is the fact
that they can choose to see, and they can also fail to do so. Later on in the letter:
Eyes
& polis,
fishermen,
& poets
or in every human head I’ve known is
busy
both:
the attention, and
the care
however much each of us
chooses our own
kin and
concentration
(MP, I. 28, 32)
Gloucester is composed of people, and they are able to see. But Maximus wants a kind of
attention beyond what is seen: he wants an attention that is concentrated and one that cares. This

86
is the choice that Maximus offers up, the one he demands people make, because “so few/ have
the polis/ in their eye” (MP, I. 28, 32). This sense that attention is necessary, that it needs to be
undertaken with serious precision is undercut by the final few lines in the poem: “There are no
hierarchies, no infinite, no such many as mass, there are only/ eyes in all heads/ to be looked out
of” (MP, I. 29, 33). On the one hand Maximus suggests that the kind of stamina it requires to
engage with the world through the body is just as demanding as it is to engage with it through
thought. So too, though, Maximus posits that it is not a complicated task, despite its necessity. If
polis is eyes, Maximus demands that people simply use them, and use them with polis in mind.
Olson’s gesture is not one that can merely be understood with regards to physical
movement only; this idea that gesture is connected to his identification as a postmodern poet is
not only an aesthetic quality that can be found in the minute uses of his grammar, or through the
way he manipulates prepositions like “of” and “as. Olson’s gesture is not only one that merely
occurs in language. It is a way of living, a behavior, a choice, really that he asks people to make.
To pay attention to place and all that constitutes it.
“Letter 9” seems to encapsulate a sense of how it is that these people of a nation, as
people of a polis, of a particular place, must follow suit with some sense of direction. Towards
the end of the letter Maximus likens “self-acts” to that of the plums he mentions in an earlier
poem: “that those self-acts which have no end no more than their own/ are more as plums are/
than they are as Alfreds/ who so advance/ men’s affairs” (MP, I. 44, 48). In this sense Maximus
equates human action, “self-acts”, to the objects in the world that are continually in the process
of becoming. In this sense, action occurs in the progressive tense, not the present: to arrive at the
present moment is a progressive seeking. The letter ends: “I measure my song,/ measure the
sources of my song,/ measure me, measure my forces” (MP, I. 44, 44). Earlier in the songs the

87
small line is introduced: “you sing, you/ who also/ wants”. Action bears with it the desire to
pursue it. Like the “of” that expanded the origin of “form”, the word “measure” here expands the
confines of the song, the “self-act”: one measures his song, but in order to do so, one measures
the origins of that song. The source is found internally, the force is found within the body that
carries a history of experience with it in the present. The end of “Letter 9” weaves together
many of Olson’s ideas thus far. Olson is concerned with action, yes, and the action is done by the
body. The body itself is able to gesture, is able to move, with both a regard for what came before
it, in order to initiate the “forwarding” in the present moment, the “next second”, whatever is
“around the bend”. Action occurs with the simultaneous operation of both the past coming to
bear on the present, and the present as an ever shifting, developing idea. The present is in the
process of arriving. If this be so, then any measure of oneself is continually changing, as it
should, for the present continues to present itself as the past fuels one’s actions forward. In the
midst of this, in the process of becoming, Olson suggests that attention be paid to everything and
anything, because everything is already there: “There may be no more names than there are
objects/ There can be no more verbs than there are actions/ It is still/morning” (MP, I. 36, 40).
The demand for action is directed towards things, towards objects is what each person must feel
within the machine of their body. It is this machine that allows a person to do something and by
doing so, engages with the world, with the things that the eyes see. “It is still morning” because
action is still occurring, space is opening up. The demand is on the reader to look while the poet
points.

88
Movement (

Gestures are carried out through the body. They are physical acts. Mudras. Like the
ideogram: they signify some idea with such force, with such immediate impact. Information is
more quickly understood by the eye than the ear, says Rousseau. And yet, sound is more
arousing.
If Olson’s task is a self-proclaimed archeological one, how does he deal with language?
And if the body is central to this engagement, how does the language both gesture: convey
information the way an image can, and simultaneously: both arouse interest and preserve fact?
And what of force? How does the reader come to understand the gesture if the body is not
present, but removed? What kind of record does the gesture makes if, in a physical sense, it
vanishes after it has been performed?
What is the force of gesture in language and how does it record, preserve, while at the
same time, put into motion the events of the past, present, and future?

89
Since Condillac refers in the Essay to ‘the force alone of the connexion’ to define the relation
between a presence and an absence, a perception and all its others; since he refers to beginning
with attention and imagination, in what sense must we understand the word force? To what sense
must we extend it? Reserve it? And if, the organizing thesis of this discourse, language is
primordially metaphorical; if the primitive is figured, where is force found?
-Jacques Derrida, The Archeology of the Frivolous, 77
***
But the concepts compressed in the title The Mind is a Muscle itself open a more complex twoway street in the relationship between doing and thinking. Mind-as-muscle signifies a conflation
of action and consciousness, readable as gesture.
--Catherine Wood, Yvonne Rainer: The Mind is a Muscle, 36
***
“A Later Note on Letter #15”
In English the poetics became muebles—furniture—
thereafter (after 1630
& Descartes was the value
until Whitehead, who cleared out the gunk
by getting the universe in (as against man alone
& that concept of history (not Herodotus’s.
which was a verb, to find out for yourself:
‘istorin, which makes any one’s acts a finding out for him or her
self, in other words restores the traum: that we act somewhere
at least by seizure, that the objective (example Thucidides, or
the latest finest tape-recorder, or any form of record on the spot
—live television or what—is a lie
as against what we know went on, the dream: the dream being
self-action with Whitehead’s important corollary: that no event
is not penetrated, in intersection or collision with, an eternal
event
The poetics of such a situation
are yet to be found out
--The Maximus Poems, II. 79, 249

90

III. Presence

Olson proclaims himself to be an archeologist. What is the archeologist’s task? To
uncover fact, to know what happened. In sum, to act on his ‘istorin. At the end of “Letter 9”
Maximus writes: “measure my forces”. This act involves an awareness, a keen attention on what
came before oneself, before the song of oneself. What is the source of this force? Derrida asks
the question in The Archeology of the Frivolous as a response to Condillac’s On the Origin of
Human Knowledge. It is precisely this question, this issue of force, where it is found, how it is
measured, what impact it has, that challenges this notion that a gesture is done in Olson’s
language. What kind of impact does a physical gesture have that the written word does not?
Olson’s interest in the ideogram is relevant to this question. Towards the end of 1950 he
traveled to the Yucatan peninsula. While in Mexico, he wrote a series of letters to Robert Creeley
chronicling his studies of the Mayan hieroglyphs. Olson, like Ezra Pound, studied the Chinese
ideogram. Both poets asserted that the visual character (a pictorial language) stands closer to the
phenomena of nature rather than the way Western languages tend to describe things through
reason and representation. Moreover Western languages tends to function in such a way so that
consciousness is equated with logic. A markedly different kind of perception is translated with

91
the image. Olson’s studies of the Mayan hieroglyphs are an extension of his interests in the
ideogram and Pound’s musings. He writes to Creeley on March 20, 1950:
Because there was a concept at work, not surely ‘sacred,’ just a disposition to
keep the attention poised in such a way that there was a time to (1) be interested
in expression in gesture of all creatures including at least three large planets
enough to create a system of record which we now call hieroglyphs […] Here is
the most abstract and formal deal of all the things this people dealt out—and yet,
to my taste, it is precisely as intimate as verse is (Mayan Letters, 93-94).
The process by which gesture solidifies into sign, as motion is translated into a legible picture, is
how Olson wishes verse to function. This attention to a particular culture’s means of
communication parallels Olson’s idea about poetry as “work” or as process. The method of
interaction between people, that of recording movement in stone, can be translated to the word
making process of poetry. Additionally, Olson’s scrupulous study of the hieroglyphs mirror his
demand on the reader, like the citizen, to pay attention to things. He writes in “Human
Universe”: “It was better to be a bird, as these Maya seem to have been, they kept moving their
heads so nervously to stay alive, to keep alerted to what they were surrounded by, to watch it
even for the sake they took it to be or that larger bird they had to be in awe of[…] (HU 64). At
the end of a later note to Creeley on March 15th Olson includes a short poem. It reads:
The fish is speech. Or see
what, cut
in stone
starts. For
when the sea breaks, watch
watch, it is the
tongue, and
he who introduces the words (the
interlocutor), the
beginner of the word, he
you will find, he
has scales, he

92
gives off motion as
in the sun the wind the light, the fish
moves
(Mayan Letters, 101)
The first sentence: “The fish is speech”. The statement implies the equation between the fish
swimming and the words that come from an attention to that movement. What is striking in the
next few lines is the idea that once a perception is put into stone, it is not frozen there, but rather,
it instigates something: “cut/in stone/ starts”. Starts what? The next stanza reaffirms the previous
one on a much larger scale. He looks at the ocean: “when the sea breaks, watch/watch”. The
repetition the words at the line break caution a reader that may have “missed” the crest of the
wave come crashing down. The meaning is found in the motion of the action: when the sea
breaks, it is the tongue. Speech comes into being when attention is paid to the motion of things
that can be missed by a lazy eye. “He who introduces the words” is later revealed to be a
constituent in the motion of the fish and the wave. The poet is not inert: “you will find, he/ has
scales, he/ gives off motion as”. Olson emphasizes the sense that any perceiver has an external
skin that allows him to experience the objects and material around him at any point. Conversely,
he not only notices motion but he “gives off motion” as “in the sun the wind the light , the fish/
moves”. Olson jots down the three elements in order without commas (sun, wind, light) to get
the pictures across just as quickly as they would when seeing them as one complete image in
nature. The perceiver is in motion just as the phenomena he watches is also moving. Action is
probably better understood at this point in Olson’s poetics to be an interaction between the body
and the things outside of it: both of which are in motion. In language, the task is to recapture the
events and movements that have happened in such a way so that in language, that same
dynamism between the word-maker and the perceived objects remains the same.

93
Michel Foucault describes the task of the archeologist in The Archeology of Knowledge.
Foucault opposes the apparatus of the history of ideas with that of archeology. The first
distinction that he makes is the fact that archeology is not an interpretive discipline: “it does not
seek another, better-hidden discourse. It refuses to be ‘allegorical’” (Foucault 139). The meaning
of things and ideas is revealed in their being there, rather than what they stand for. Archeology in
this regard seeks to understand things in their presence rather than their symbolic or
metaphorical significance. Presence is an important concept that archeology depends upon. It can
be understood similarly with reference to the way Olson describes simile and comparison:
description does not get the poet closer to things; it abstracts him from them. The things in the
poem are present. Olson hopes the reader will look closely at them. “Letter 11” requires this kind
of attention to the particulars of place:
The rock reads
the rock I know by my belly and torn nails, the letters on it
big enough I sat in triumph arriving,
by a head start,
run up the face, grab the stone emboss
anchor rope
carved from it) get onto
the bronze plaque:
(MP, I. 48, 52)

Metaphor, simile, and comparison pull words away from that which they represent. Archeology
seeks to understand things as they are: it does not describe them. The second point that Foucault
makes is the idea that archeology strives to “define discourses in their specificity; to show in
what way the set of rules that they are put into operation is reducible to any other; to follow them
the whole length of their exterior ridges, in order to underline them the better” (Foucault 139).
Archeology seeks to define ideas in their specificity, not in their relation to other ideas, which is

94
what history seeks to do by tracing the “continuous, insensible transition that relates discourses”
(Foucault 139). The archeological approach to things has to do with underlining them in their
uniqueness.
Such is the task for Olson in his poetry. In A Special View of History Olson describes this
very phenomenon of successive events and the idea of human action in history. In the section
entitled “THE FACTORS”, Olson develops the ideas of human action, human motion, and the
passage of time with regards to John Keats’s idea of Negative Capability and Heraclitus’ idea of
flux and the human:
THAT ALL THINGS ARE IN MOTION INCLUDES the human: the
familiar turns out to be simply that, there is a natural, proper and characteristic
action of man—
PROCESS: ‘any phenomenon which shows a continuous
change in Time’
MAN IS A CONTINUOUS CHANGE IN TIME (SVH 33).
All things are in motion: this includes the human body. Man is a continuous change in time. As
he evolves he acts: “To act or not to act: can you drive the familiar situation of being a human
any further?” (SVH 33).
The idea that “all things are in motion” (including the human) and the fact that the single
man acts (this is evidence of his humanness) seem to be at odds with the fact that Olson places
considerable attention on the individual and not the collective. If all things are in motion, and this
includes al humans, why does Olson single out the individual? Thus far in this exploration of
Olson’s work there has been no mention of the relationship between two bodies that act in space:
it appears that Olson is only writing about the individual. Is this the case? Is the task of the
archeologist merely to look at individual things: be they one human, one tansy flower, one city
(Gloucester), one Maximus? Is Olson’s project really to follow things in motion in their
singularity? Consider the letter at the beginning of The Maximus Poems:

95
I, Maximus of Gloucester, to You (MP, I.1, 5)
The method of communication is the address: the I addresses the You. Though distinct, they are
connected. The single man addresses himself to the city. The epigraph to the note to Creeley just
before the first letter reads: “All my life I’ve heard/one makes many” (MP, 4). The archeological
approach Olson embarks on throughout the collection is not merely focused on the individual
alone. The individual body that acts is essential, and Olson pays attention to this, but with an
attention to the individual comes the inevitable connection to the “You”. The letter is the
connection between them: it establishes the singularity of both parties, yet joins them through the
address.
Olson’s archeological approach seeks to realize things and persons alike in motion, but
does not seek to evaluate their meaning metaphorically. A fisherman working on a boat near the
shore of Gloucester bears his significance in himself, in his work, in his own USE. The Maximus
Poems is not one long poem: it is a collection of many, all of which constitute the whole. Olson’s
sense that the poem is a process of unfolding makes this idea of the collective and the individual
much easier to comprehend. The individual units constitute a whole, but the whole is forever
expanding, and so are the parts. Foucault writes: “Archeology is much more willing than the
history of ideas to speak of discontinuities, ruptures, gaps, entirely new forms of positivity, and
of sudden redistributions” (Foucault 169). Olson does not seek to engender a poem that seeks to
place person-to-person and thing-to-thing in direct relation to each other. Rather, his focus is on
what occurs between them: the gaps between them that illustrate their continual movement.
It is an arduous task: to try to “measure” the force of Olson’s language, to attempt in
some way to undertake this archeological approach to what has ostensibly been left behind: the
gesture has left an imprint, and it can be read. This idea is complicated and cannot be answered

96
with regards to poetry alone. Perhaps understanding the operation of the gesture of the body
before applying it to that of language will illustrate this idea. A comprehension of the impact, the
kinetic affect of the gesture, is perhaps best understood in light of the field of choreography.
Olson writes in the essay “A Syllabary for A Dancer” the essential fact that dance teaches people
to use themselves. He writes: “[…]man is a thing which thinks and dances. I should imagine the
meaning is, a thing which simultaneously thinks and dances” (Maps 9). Olson himself was a
frequent attendee of Merce Cunningham’s lectures and class sessions at Black Mountain
College. Reference to dance is made often in his poetry and prose.8 The separation of the mind
and the body is challenged by dance. The body moves, it is conscious, it is thinking.
Yvonne Rainer and Simone Forti were two female American choreographers in the late
1950s through the 1970s that theorized the interactions between language, body, gesture, and
breath. Their work in performance may compliment Olson’s project as an archeologist.
Simone Forti’s text Handbook in Motion is an account of her early choreographic efforts
in the 1960s. Forti, among other postmodern American choreographers, was interested in
gestural movement, movement of the everyday: movement as a fact of the body as opposed to
movement that could be measured for stylistic elaborateness. Early in the book she provides a
definition of what she calls “kinesthetic awareness”: “The kinesthetic sense has to do with
sensing movement in your own body, sensing your body’s changing dynamic configurations. But
8

His play The Firey Hunt was composed as a text score for two male dancers to play the roles of Ahab
and Ishmael within a loose framework of the Melvillian tale. Olson experimented with stage directions
that instruct the performers to dance and make gestures with their body that are dictated by the language
he uses in the verse. Olson also wrote a short piece called Appolonius of Tyana: A Dance, with Some
Words, for Two Actors. In it he explores the relationship between dancing and concentration: “As Tyana
speaks the introduction most slowly and most clearly, it should be as though the words came out of the
mouth of the forward figure, the dancer—whose lips do not move, or his features, at first, they are held,
and it is like a soliloquy in the cinema, with the face steady and the words coming from the sound track,
like thoughts alongside the concentration” (Olson 133).

97
it’s more than that. I can remember waking from dreams and still having a sense of the dream
landscape not only in my memory but in my limbs as well” (Forti 31). Forti seems to suggest
here that memory is in fact recorded within the body. The body is itself a capsule of events: a
plane on which events are recorded. The present body is a vessel of the past: half full. So too, the
present body engages with what is happening, what it is capable of in the moment: it is half
empty and may be filled. Kinesthetic awareness is not a “measurement” of movement, but an
access to it. A bringing forth of something from within. Olson’s idea of proprioception is
relevant: the internal energy is revealed through the external gesture. Forti writes:
I wasn’t doing this in a studied way, it was simply a mechanism of intelligence
that I found existing in my body. I sensed that I had hit on an organic set of links
between mind, balance, and gesture, and it seemed that here was the basis for a
natural language. Sometimes, having achieved a state of balance, I would lift my
eyes up and to the right as if saying hello. The sudden asymmetry would take me
by surprise and the resultant internal careening of my center seemed to radiate
into an outburst of a kind of song whose melody was made of movement. And I
would find myself weaving movement melodies charged with stories the body
holds (Forti 131).
Intelligence exists within the body and needs to be tapped into. Proprioception is this very idea
of the realization that the body does, in its viscera, carry the weight of what came before. To
quote his essay, Olson writes: “PROPRIOCEPTION: the data of depth sensibility/ the ‘body’/ of
us as object which spontaneously/ or of its own order produces experiences/ of ‘depth’ Viz/
SENSIBILITY WITHIN THE ORGANISM/BY THE MOVEMENT OF ITS OWN TISSUES”
(Olson 182). Forti is clear: it was an intelligence that she found already existing within her body.
And she found it, it was present. It already existed, and therefore through a kind of
“archeological” sensibility, or as she calls it a “kinesthetic awareness”, Forti locates the very
“forces of her song”. The songs were “charged”, they were imbued with force from the from

98
language that the body itself already accumulated, encoded in the viscera. Like Olson, Forti finds
that the breath is central to any kind of transmission of energy, be it physical or linguistic:
I started working on an action in which, as I exhale, I give in to centripetal force.
And as I inhale, well, I don’t know what it is, maybe my center rises, but suddenly
I’m much more under the sway of centrifugal force. And I loop in and out of the
circle on my way round and round (Forti 136).
The breath itself is the energy source behind the force that the body is able to access. In
movement, Forti suggests that as she exhales, as she breathes outwards, she relinquishes control
to a strength that circulates the motion of the body to a center point. Conversely, when she
inhales, this central node rises, and her body is controlled by a force that resists a center. The
respirating corpus navigates between these two forces.
This center, this core, is difficult to locate and comprehend. Forti’s thoughts in movement
are helpful with regards to understanding Olson’s relationship between the body and language,
however. Forti postulates that body itself contains a linguistic component that is released in
movement, so that the physical operation of the body seems to follow a kind of narrative logic, a
spatial unfolding of expressible events. What Forti alludes to is this sense that a combination of
the mind, a balance of the center, and the performance of a gesture themselves constitute a kind
of “natural language”. This second property: the balance of the center, seems to require a kind of
awareness on the part of the mover to recognize that critical moment when the body is “offkilter”, between the centrifugal and centripetal ends. It requires a kind of awareness of the body
in between theses two nodes.
In April of 1968, Yvonne Rainer, a young contemporary of Forti’s, presented her evening
length piece The Mind is a Muscle at the Anderson Theater in New York City (Wood 36). The
performers did use stylized movement. As Rainer mentions in her artist statement in the
evening’s program: “[…] it is also true that I love the body—its actual weight, mass, and

99
unenhanced physicality. It is my overall concern to reveal people as they are engaged in various
kinds of activities—alone, with each other, with objects—and to weight the quality of the human
body toward that of objects and away from the super-stylization of the dancer” (Rainer, circa
1968, from Tulane Drama Review). Rainer’s apparent objective was to experiment with seven
dancers. Each body, each physical mass, were revealed in relation to one another, through a
study of the gestural and everyday movement of the body. The everyday in Rainer’s dance
complements Olson’s attention to the familiar in poetry.
Catherine Wood’s analysis of Rainer’s work provides helpful material when thinking
about Rainer’s objective towards making images that relied on this kind of “unadorned”
movement. Wood writes: “But the concepts compressed in the title The Mind is a Muscle itself
open a more complex two-way street in the relationship between doing and thinking. Mind-asmuscle signifies a conflation of action and consciousness, readable as gesture” (Wood 36). It is
difficult not to invoke Olson with regards to Rainer’s work in dance. A conflation between action
(movement of the body) and consciousness (perhaps the recognition of a ‘center’ by Forti),
makes the gesture readable. Wood continues: “If the mind is a muscle, consciousness cannot be
known unto itself, but can only be demonstrated and shared via gesture” (Wood 65). What is
central to this use of gesture is the fact that it signifies the consciousness of the performer.
Through a demonstration of gesture, the one that performs the action comes to know
consciousness. This suggests that in performing the gesture, the dancer then undergoes some
kind process of realization. Wood writes of Rainer: “Her pragmatist stance led to an aesthetic of
radical laconicism that bypassed the fundamental question of bodily ‘authenticity’, and instead
formulated new ways of behaving or performing herself” (Wood 36). Here the performer,
through movement, comes to know consciousness through movement and is able to explore a

100
variety of behaviors, ways of engaging, and means of communicating. Through the gesture, the
mind-as-muscle pays attention through physical action: it arrives at consciousness through the
process of movement.
Rainer was herself a poet. In the conclusion to her memoir, Feelings Are Facts, she
writes the following with regards to language and movement:
I don’t know what this relation/opposition between words and body means or
portends. As I returned to dance in the 1990s I stopped writing poetry. And now
again movement language is superseding verbal language. I tell myself ‘Don’t
worry. The mind works in mysterious ways, even stranger than the body.’ The
body declines, the mind continues to extrude language. I look forward to the
perambulations of both—mind and body—in the next decade. It follows, then,
that this epilogue can be read as another prologue (Rainer 466).
This notion that “epilogue” may be read as another “prologue” is so reminiscent of Olson’s ideas
in A Special View of History. Her fascination with these two properties, mind and body, has to
do with a kind of cyclical temporality. The intersections (and differences) between these two
domains are both the beginning and the end: the future is the necessary tension, repulsion, and
attraction of both. This relationship between body and words is one that will last. For Rainer this
relationship is ongoing, continual, both in the past and the immanent future. Olson’s job in the
“morning” acts on the potentiality of language within “the next second” (MP, I.4,8) of time. The
conscious body acting on the instant makes the past become present: the prologue and the
epilogue collapse into the present moment. The poem “The Song and Dance of” begins: “In the
present go/ nor right nor left;”/ nor stay” (MP, I. 54, 58).
Olson’s challenge for instantaneous action is alas in language. Consider the short section
in Olson’s “Tyrian Businesses”, in which he poses this very task: “how to dance/sitting down”
(MP, I.35, 39). This is precisely the link between Rainer and Olson: how to deal with the
relationship between word and body. Rainer is able to communicate through gesture a kind of

101
language, and so too, how Olson is able to make language move, make words move, so that they
themselves gesture, act, and communicate.
Olson’s notion that the poem is composed on the “field” is influenced by Einstein’s
theory of relativity. Shahar Bram writes in Charles Olson and Alfred North Whitehead: An Essay
on Poetry: “The field, as defined by Ferris, is the ‘domain or environment in which the real or
potential action of a force can be described mathematically at each point in space’; ‘force’ is the
agency responsible for change in a system’” (Bram 20). The field is the plain on which action
can occur at any moment, force is the source responsible for the change.
In the context of dance, force comes from the body: the energy pathways of the internal,
the oscillation between the centripetal and centrifugal nodes forces the body to follow the
circular pathways, according to Forti. In language, though, how do these notions of “field” and
“force” apply? For Olson, says Bram: “When the definition of field is ‘transposed’ to the realm
of poetry, we have a domain or environment where we can describe the actual or potential
activity of a force for any point in space, when force, as ‘the agency responsible for a change in a
system’ is, in this case, language in all its aspects” (Bram 22). Force in this sense comes from the
language, which is imbued with energy from the body. This attitude is what Olson argues for in
“A Later Note on Letter #15”. Olson, like Whitehead, is challenging the theory of reality as
proposed by Descartes. A “poetics of furniture” is what Olson rejects: instead he promotes the
notion that the field is expanding and the words themselves are the force that enhances this
expansion. Whitehead and “gets the universe” into the poem. Thus, the poem, like the universe,
is ever expanding, shifting, changing.
Forti uses the phrase “natural language” to describe the cohesion between body, gesture,
and thought. Her emphasis on the organic has to do primarily with the connection between

102
language and the body. A natural language would merely rely on the movement of the body to
communicate, to tell a story. The social aspect is clearly of importance to Olson and the nature
of speech must be looked into aside the gesture. Speech is the force behind Olson’s language.
The breath is what Olson says gets all the energy back into the poem in the essay “Projective
Verse”. Speech advances the field forwards just as much as the body does. Olson pairs the
tongue with logos.
Heinrich Von Kleist’s essay called “On The Gradual Construction of Thoughts During
Speech” focuses on the relationship between thinking and conversation. He explains the
difficulty in formulating thoughts when sitting alone, while not speaking. Kleist observes that
when he begins speaking with his sister, his thoughts immediately become clear to him: “I
discover facts which whole hours of brooding, perhaps, would not have revealed […] I only have
to begin boldly and the mind, obliged to find an end for this beginning, transforms my confused
concept as I speak into thoughts that are perfectly clear, so that, to my surprise, the end of the
sentence coincides with the desired knowledge” (Kleist 42). The social dynamic between speaker
and listener instigates the process by which the speaker clarifies himself. Speech does not inhibit
thought, it draws it out: “The chains of ideas and of their designations proceed together at the
same speed, and the mental documents for the one and for the other agree. Then speech is not an
impediment, a sort of brake on the wheel of intellect, but like a second wheel running parallel
with it on the same axle” (Kleist 44). Speech runs alongside the successive chain of ideas of the
mind. Speech and thought operate on the same continuum: both wheels turn at the same time. If
the thought is completed before the utterance of the thought, the mind relaxes when the statement
is made. What Kleist is arguing for is the excitement of the individual’s mind when thought

103
occurs through the act of speaking, not before or after it. If the thought is completed before
speech, the mind relaxes.
The relationship between speaker and listener is important. Olson begins Maximus with a
letter. In doing this, Maximus addresses not one place but all the people that compose it: he
addresses the polis populated by all the beings within it. The force behind the language is not
only the energy of the body, but this essential relationship between the one person as part of a
larger whole.
Denise Levertov’s “Notes on Organic Form” sites Olson’s “Projective Verse” essay. She
explores the “natural” development of language in poetry as it relates to experience, the body,
and action. Organic form suggests that that there is a form in all things, including experience,
which the poet must discover and reveal. Olson’s influence is clear. Levertov explores the idea
of putting into language the experience the poet has in the world: this requires action, movement,
and then subsequent speech after the experience has happened: “How does one go about such a
poetry? I think it’s like this: first there must be an experience, a sequence of constellation of
perceptions of sufficient interest, felt by the poet intensely enough to demand of him their
equivalence in words: he is brought to speech” (Levertov 8). The poet is brought to speech after
he has acted, after he has experienced the world. He is brought to speech because he is
compelled by what has already happened to him.
The initial question needs to be asked again: what is the source of Olson’s gesture in
language? The poet “brought to speech” as Levertov writes, has undergone experience and is
forced to put that experience into language. Perhaps understanding the sources of Olson’s gesture
involves a better understanding of Olson’s views of what the poet should put into writing. John
Tytell writes in the Forward to Letters for Origin: “And the best subject for poetry, Olson

104
advises Corman, who is trying to write his own poems, is not what you think is proper but
always the self, the autobiographical perspective” (Glover xi). Individual experience in the world
is the prerequisite for Olson’s writing. But this insistence on the individual is not without a
consideration of the collective. To repeat the opening epigraph to The Maximus Poems once
again: “All my life I’ve heard/ one makes many” (MP). The individual is implied to be part of a
larger sum. Therefore an individual action, in art or in life, affects the space exists in.
Olson argues that human beings are a result of a series of events in a particular space. In
the poem “Maximus to Gloucester, Letter 27 [Withheld]” Olson writes: “An American/ is a
complex of occasions,/ themselves a geometry/ of spatial nature” (MP, II.15,185). Olson means
to suggest here that the living body is a result of successive events in history. Olson takes this
idea again from Whitehead. The sense that the body is a complex of occasions suggests that the
body is continually changing like space itself.
How does the poet arrive at what he does say? What is the source of the force that is
carried out in speech? “Letter 11” reads:
That a man’s life
(his, anyway)
is what there is
that tradition is
at least is where I find it,
how I got to
what I say
(MP, I.48, 52)
Robert Creeley writes in “Charles Olson: Y & X” the following: “For Olson the line becomes a
way to a movement beyond the single impact of the words which go to make it up, and brings to
their logic a force of its own” (152). The words within the line constitute the line that moves
beyond the impact of those words themselves. Consider the first line followed by the second

105
“That a man’s life” and then “(his, anyway)”. Emphasis is on the pronoun. He locates not the
many, but “his”, meaning the distinct life that any one person has. What constitutes a life? Read
without the parenthetical: “That a man’s life […] is what there is/ that tradition is”. A life is what
there is, what exists. The last three lines: “at least is where I find it, how I got to/what I say”.
Tradition is where man finds what already exists, and once found, through the process of (“how I
got to”) what that individual may arrive at what he can say about “his” life.
Creeley writes in a later essay on Olson: “The Maximus Poems are, or seem first to me,
the modulation of man’s attentions, by which I mean the whole wonder of perception. They are
truth because their form is the issue of what is out there, and what part of it can come into man’s
own body […] The local is not a place but a place in a given man—what part of it he has
compelled or else brought by love to give witness to in his own mind” (Creeley 157). Man’s life
is what there is, the what and whom that are around him. The Maximus Poems are not only about
attention to things in motion, but they are an account of this one poet’s necessity to say: to put
into words the motion that has already been perceived. “To make that present, and actual for
other men, is not an embarrassment, but love (Creeley 158). The force for Olson is not merely
found in his body, his proprioception, but from a need to make present something that has
happened, the actual events of human life, in language. This is the basis of his archeological
approach.
Olson’s poetics of action is essentially an “interaction” between perceiver and object.
This can be understood as the process by which the knower-to-be notices the things within the
space around the body. Consider the poem “Maximus to Gloucester, Letter 27 [withheld]”:
An American
is a complex of occasions,

106
themselves a geometry
of spatial nature.

I have this sense,
with my skin
Plus this-plus this:
that forever the geography
which leans in
on me I compell
backwards I compell Gloucester
to yield, to
change
Polis
is this
(MP, II.15.185)
The first line echoes the line from A Special View of History: “MAN IS A CONTINUOUS
CHANGE IN TIME” (20). Olson insists on the position of the American within space; on that
space the citizen engages in moments of interaction. So too the space itself acts upon the
American: the geography leans in. The American “compels backwards” onto the place where he
exists. Interaction not only involves the force of the individual on place, and vice versa, but with
the idea that once interaction occurs, change has occurred. The measure of change is Polis.
“This” is the interaction between person and place, between person and objects. The opening line
of “The Kingfishers” is relevant: “What does not change/ is the will to change” (Olson 167).

107
The American that compels backwards onto Gloucester, onto the place he dwells in, wills
himself to do so.
The gesture in Olson’s work is made with considerable force, and this force is continually
forward moving as the events in a life are continually happening. Poetry is a process. Wisdom is
recognition of movement : its work is “get things on”. Charles Olson’s gesture is the work he has
done in poetry. Language is for forwarding. The poet brought to speech in the present puts the
events of his past into the present. The archeologist of morning unearths both what has happened
and remains aware of what is present. In poetry these events are put into the words of the
morrow. The poet seizes the opportunity to put into language the world coming into being. “It is
still morning”, Olson writes, because the poem, like the world, is continuously expanding. The
poem “The Telesphere” appears towards the end of Volume III of Maximus:

an actual earth of value to
construct one, from rhythm to
image, and image is knowing, and
knowing, Confucius says, brings one
to the goal: nothing is possible without
doing it. It is where the test lies, malgre
all the thought and all the pell-mell of
proposing it. Or thinking it out or living it
ahead of time.
Reading about my world,
March 6th, 1968
(MP, III.190, 584)

108
The poet acts on the instant, that pursues all possibility through action, nears knowledge. “The
Earth, then, is conceivably a knowable, a seizable, a single, and your thing, and yours as a single
thing and person yourself” (Casual Mythology 118). The reader, the poet, the painter or dancer,
American citizen, the single human body engage with the world and come a step closer to
knowing it. The possibility for action is always present. It is still morning. We learn this from
Maximus:

It is undone business
I speak of, this morning,
with the sea
stretching out
from my feet
(MP, I. 53, 57)

109

Remarks

The force behind the endeavor to re-read Olson’s work was the desire to reconcile two of
my interests: performance and poetry, with one another. The performance that I made a year
ago was the first time that I realized that these two interests of mine could be interlaced in a
critically engaging way. I didn’t know that my desire to pursue both of these in writing would
lead me back to the very poet I had originally kept at bay for a lack of understanding, for my
inability to say anything substantial about the work at all. Making a performance after reading
Spicer made immediate sense to me. The link between these two forms is the idea action, a
powerful notion I had not understood fully with regards to Olson. There was a lot I needed to
reexamine. I had overlooked the field.
The first time I read Olson’s poetry I had no idea how to navigate my way through it. I
couldn’t hold onto anything in the language that made me stick with it long enough to get
something from it. I read “Projective Verse”, I understood it on a fundamental level, I could
sense that Olson’s objectives were vast and that they needed to be met, NOW, in the present
moment (that present being 1950 and all subsequent years ahead.) I couldn’t yet say that I was a
reader that understood Olson’s ideas, his aims for poetry, his verse.

110
Something changed for me though. I was less doubtful once I watched the footage.
Readers of Olson absolutely need to familiarize themselves with the full scope of what he means
by physicality, the active, the kinetic. I could not yet explain why Olson made sense to me after
watching him read “Letter 27” but I knew that I had been missing some crucial part of him: this
being his body, its movement, his distinct sensibility, cadence of breath. I was delighted to find
that the letter was marked as “[Withheld]”. It was the piece of evidence I had missed the first
time around that would fill in the gap for me as a reader.
Olson’s presence as far as influence is concerned is important to mention. Poets like
Diane Di Prima, Anne Waldman, Denise Levertov, Edward Dorn, Robert Duncan, Jack Spicer,
Barbara Guest, Susan Howe, Joanne Kyger, to name only a few, have in their own distinct ways
formulated their approach to poetry with Olson in mind. Waldman sites the Berkeley Poetry
Conference of 1965 as her “confirmation of a life in poetry” and mentions the moment in the
lecture when he says, “I’m in the presence of an event” (Alcalay 163). Poetry becomes an
investigative process by which the poet-perceiver, looking out of his eyes, learns through
watching, by noticing the immediate movement of the now. The open field continually expands as
each new event, “the next second”, come into being. The Maximus Poems stretch outwards to
limits that Olson wished could extend infinitely. Man sees motion and tries to name it. The world
of the poem grows. The challenge for the poet is that he must simultaneously tell what already
happened and devote attention to what will happen moments later. The past, therefore, exerts its
force onto the present moment. It force the field to extend outward to enormous proportions.
Olson says history is the function of a human life. The past is inherently present in the living,
breathing, and present body. The past can be examined because the body is here, and the body
has collected its fair share of experiences through the skin.

111
“I am in the presence of an event.”
The gesture revealed itself to me when I did return to Olson’s work. The repetition of the
preposition “of” at the end of so many of the lines in Maximus force the reader to ask “of
what?” The preposition points to nothing more than the space that lies beyond it. The line acts
like a mannerism, like Olson’s finger that points to some distant location in the film clip when he
utters the phrase “polis is this”. The viewer, like the reader, follows the force of the poet’s
gesture. He indicates, names, points to something: some thing, any one thing, in space. The
gesture in Olson’s poetry forces the reader to confront the same space that the poet has, to step
onto topographical expanse of the page, and to notice an instantaneous unfolding of language.
Ann Lauterbach writes in her poem “Gesture and Flight”:
A gesture, a glance
So the thing stood for its instance
Folded tidily under the lamplight
With the logic of fact.
(from Clamor, 50)
The gesture remains an essential fact of the human body that performed it. The gesture is made
with considerable force in the instant it is performed. “So the thing stood its instance” reminds
me of that idea Olson mentions when he writes to Cid Corman: “to make the thing stand on its
own feet as, a force, in, the fields of force which surround everyone of us, of which we, too, are
forces: to stand FORTH” (Olson 20).
How to make meaning with motion is the task of the poet. The Chinese ideogram and the
Mayan hieroglyphs capture the things in the world as they move and as they are noticed by the

112
perceiver. Olson wants language to function similarly: to get words closer to the things they
point to: to make words act like the things do.
The body is the means by which our experience in the world can be measured. To
“measure the sources of my song” is to look into the body: to archeologically pursue the space
of that internal space: to find place within the internal viscera of a physical presence.
Rainer’s Trio A is perhaps the most famous piece of The Mind is a Muscle work. In it she
performs a solo: the choreography unfolds as one continuous motion. Rainer does not look at the
camera or pause at any moment during the entirety of the piece. The prologue of movement
becomes epilogue: one movement of the body continues into the next, the force of the preceding
body configuration pull Rainer into the subsequent ones. There is a sense that Rainer continues
to retrace circular pathways with her body. Past becomes present as she navigates the space
with each new instant of movement.
“Any form of record on the spot” is the idea, I think, that breath allows language to
capture what is happening as it is happening. On the spot: at that moment on the canvas, the
field of the page.
The task of the poet is to enact language: to make it move. In order to do so, the poet
must see himself within the continual expansion of space. The poet as an object among objects.
I’ll end here with some lines from the Tao Te Ching. I return again to the very premise that
naming matters. This very epilogue, I am pleased to find, can be found in my prologue:
The unnamable is the eternally real.
Naming is the origin
of all particular things.
--Lao Tzu

113
Bibliography
Alcalay, Ammiel. A Little History. New York City: UpSet Press, 2013. Print.
Allen, Donald M., and Warren Tallman, eds. The Poetics of The New American Poetry. New
York: Grove Press Inc., 1973. Print.
Austin, J.L. "Performative Utterances." The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism. Ed.
Vincent B. Leitch. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2001. N. pag. Print.
Bakhtin, M.M. The Dialogic Imagination. Trans. and ed. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist.
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981. Print.
Blaser, Robin. The Fire: Collected Essays of Robin Blaser. Ed. Miriam Nichols. Berkeley: U of
California, 2006. Print.
Bourriaud, Nicolas. Relational Aesthetics. N.p.: Les presses du réel, 2002. Print.
Bram, Shahar. Charles Olson and Alfred North Whitehead. Trans. Batya Stein. Lewisberg:
Bucknell University, 2004. Print.
Brecht, Bertolt. Brecht on Theater: The Development of an Aesthetic. New York: Hill and Wang,
1957. Print.
Butterick, Charles F. A Guide to the Maximus Poems of Charles Olson. Berkeley: U of
California, 1978. Print.
Butterick, George F. "Charles Olson and the Postmodern Advance." The Iowa Review 11.4
(1980): n. pag. JSTOR. Web. 29 Apr. 2013.
Chomsky, Noam. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press, 1965. Print.
Condillac, Etienne Bonnot De. Essay on The Origin of Human Knowledge. Cambridge:
Cambridge University, 2001. Print.

114
"Cratylus." Plato: Complete Works. Ed. John M. Cooper and D.S. Hutchinson.
Cambridge/Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997. N. pag. Rpt. in Plato:
Complete Works. N.p.: n.p., n.d. N. pag. Print.
Creeley, Robert. A Quick Graph: Collected Notes and Essays. San Francisco: Four Seasons
Foundation, 1970. Print.
Davenport, Guy. The Geography of the Imagination. N.p.: David R. Godine, 1997. Print.
Derrida, Jaques. The Archeology of the Frivolous. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1973.
Print.
Dewey, John. Experience and Nature. Chicago: Open Court, 1926. Print.
Di Prima, Diane. "'Old Father, Old Artificer': Charles Olson Memorial Lecture." Lost and
Found: CUNY Poetics Document Initiative 3rd ser. (2012): n. pag. Print.
Dorn, Ed. Ed Dorn Live. Ed. Joseph Richey. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2007. Print.
Dorn, Edward. "Charles Olson Memorial Lectures." Lost and Found: CUNY Poetics Document
Initiative 3rd ser. (2012): n. pag. Print.
Ducrot, Oswald, and Tzvetan Todorov. Encyclopedic Dictionary of the Sciences of Language.
Trans. Catherine Porter. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1972. Print.
Duncan, Robert. A Selected Prose. New York City: New Directions, 1944. Print.
Eliot, T.S. "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock." Poetry Magazine (1915): 130. Poetry
Foundation. Web. 29 Apr. 2013.
<http://etryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/browse/6/3#!/20570428>.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Essays: First and Second Series. N.p.: Paperback Classics, 1983. Print.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge. Trans. A.M. Sheridan Smith. New York:
Pantheon Books, 1972. Print.

115
Havelock, Eric A. Preface to Plato. Cambridge: Harvard University, 1963. Print.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Trans. Joan Stambaugh. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1953. Print.
- - -. On the Way to Language. Trans. Peter D. Hertz. New York, London, San Francisco: Harper
& Row Publishers, 1959. Print.
- - -. Poetry, Language, Thought. Trans. Albert Hofstadter. New York: Perennial Classics, 1971.
Print.
Jakobson, Roman. "'Linguistics and Poetics', 'Two Aspects of Language and Two Types of
Aphasic Disturbances', 'The Metaphoric and Metonymic Poles .'" The Norton Anthology
of Theory and Criticism. Ed. Vincent B. Leitch. New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
2001. 1254-65. Print.
James, William. Essays in Pragmatism. New York City: Hafner, 1948. Print.
- - -. Writings:1902-1910. N.p.: Library of America, 1987. Print.
Kenneally, Christine. The First Word: The Search for the Origins of Language. New York City:
Viking, 2007. Print.
Kleist, Heinrich. "On The Gradual Construction of Thoughts During Speech." Trans. Michael
Hamburger. 1951. German Life and Letters. N.p.: n.p., n.d. 42-46. Print.
Lauterbach, Ann. The Night Sky. New York City: Viking, 2005. Print.
Levertov, Denise. "Some Notes on Organic Form." The Poet in the World. New York City: New
Directions, n.d. 7-13. Print.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Comp. Alexander Campbell Fraser.
New York: Dover Publications Inc., 1959. Print.
Lowe, Victor. Understanding Whitehead. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Paperbacks, 1966. Print.

116
Maud, Ralph. Charles Olson's Reading: A Biography. Carbondale: Southern Illinois, 1996. Print.
Morgan, Kate Tarlow. Circles and Boundaries. New York: Factory School, 2011. Print.
Olson, Charles. Additional Prose. Ed. George F. Butterick. Bolinas: Four Seasons Foundation,
1974. Print.
- - -. Archeologist of Morning. London: Cape Goliard, 1970. Print.
- - -. Collected Prose. Ed. Donald Allen and Benjamin Friedlander. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1997. Print.
- - -. Letters for Origin (1950-1956). Ed. Albert Glover. New York: Paragon House, 1969. Print.
- - -. The Maximus Poems. Berkely: University of California Press, 1960. Print.
- - -. Muthologos. Ed. Ralph Maud. Vancouver: Talonbooks, 2010. Print.
- - -. Poetry and Truth: The Beloit Lectures and Poems. Ed. George F. Butterick. Berkeley: Book
People, 1971. Print.
- - -. Selected Writings. New York: New Directions, 1966. Print.
- - -. The Special View of History. Ed. Ann Charters. Berkeley: Oyez, 1970. Print.
Pound, Ezra. The Cantos. New York City: New Directions, 1934. Print.
Rainer, Yvonne. Feelings are Facts: A Life. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
2006. Print.
- - -. The Mind is a Muscle. YouTube. Dance Film Archives, n.d. Web. 29 Apr. 2013.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aggv4jybdaY>. part 1 ; choreographed 1966 and
performed August 14, 1978
Ratcliff, Carter. The Fate of a Gesture: Jackson Pollock and Postwar American Art. Boulder:
Westview, 1996. Print.
Rosenberg, Harold. "The American Action Painters." Art News 51.8 (1952): 1-8. Print.

117
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, and Johann Gottfried Herder. On The Origin of Language. Trans. John
H. Moran and Alexander Gode. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1966. Print.
Sapir, Edward. Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech. London: Granada, 1970. Print.
Saussure, Ferdinand De. "Course in General Linguistics." Norton Anthology of Theory and
Criticism. Ed. Vincent B. Leitch. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2001. 970-77.
Print.
Shelburne, Donald. A Key to Whitehead's Process and Reality. New York City: Macmillan,
1966. Print.
Silliman, Ron. The New Sentence. New York: Roof Books, 1977. Print.
Thoreau, Henry David. Collected Essays and Poems. New York City: Library of America, 2001.
Print.
Tooke, John Horne. Epea pteroenta or The Diversions of Purley. London: William Nichols,
1860. Print.
Tzu, Lao. Tao Te Ching: An Illustrated Journey. Trans. Steven Mitchell. N.p.: Francis Lincoln,
2009. Print.
Volosinov, V.N. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge: Harvard, 1973. Print.
Waldrop, Rosmarie. "Charles Olson: Process and Relationship." Twentieth Century Literature
23.4 (1977): 467-86. JSTOR. Web. 29 Apr. 2013.
Whitehead, Alfred North. Adventures of Ideas. New York City: Macmillan, 1937. Print.
Williams, William Carlos. Selected Poems. New York City: New Directions, 1917. Print.
- - -. Spring and All. New York City: New Directions, 1923. Print.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. The Blue and Brown Books: Preliminary Studies for the "Philosophical
Investigations." New York: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1958. Print.

118
- - -. Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G.E.M. Anscombe. New York: Macmillan, 1958. Print.
- - -. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. N.p.: Createspace Independent, 2013. Print.
Wood, Catherine. Yvonne Rainer The Mind is a Muscle. N.p.: Afterall Books, 2007. Print.
Zurbrugg, Nicholas, ed. Art, Performance, Media: 31 Interviews. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota,
2004. Print.

119

