Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Fall 2015

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2015

Not to Bring Peace, But a Mirror: A Consideration
of Conceptual Poetry
Matthew William Francis Constantino
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Constantino, Matthew William Francis, "Not to Bring Peace, But a Mirror: A Consideration of Conceptual Poetry" (2015). Senior
Projects Fall 2015. Paper 1.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_f2015/1

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Fall 2015 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Not to Bring Peace, But a Mirror: 
A Consideration of Conceptual Poetry

Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Matt Constantino

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
December 2015 

Acknowledgements
This project was, like most work I submitted to the college, a difficult and often painful
endeavor— for me as much as for the people around me. It is because of this that I am
at pains to call myself proud of the work. I am hopeful, though, that someone besides
me might find a use for it. 
 
I am left mostly with an overwhelming gratitude towards those people who are around
me and have been around me over the past six years. Nothing in this time has shaped
my views more profoundly than the belief that every person deserves the support and
love that I received and that kept me alive. I hope to spend the rest of my life as a vector
through which this generosity will pass to others and towards better ends. 
 
I offer my acknowledgement and thanks to the following people. 
 
To Ann Lauterbach and Marisa Libbon, who kindly, charitably, and gracefully made the
best of it. 
 
To Lora Seery and David Shein, who advocated on my behalf, often to me, with
uncommon warmth and compassion. 
To Franco Baldasso, Marc Brudzinski, Joan Retallack, Eric Trudel, and Michael Vizsolyi,
whose classrooms and offices were respites.
 
To Kyle Baasch, Joan Baldwin, Nancy Bauer, Liv Bruce, Ashley Chaney, Catherine
DeGennaro, Loisa Fenichell, Willie Gurner, Nat Jaffe, Irina Kalinka, Nicole Lang, Amy
List, Rosie Lopeman, Julia Lunsford, Carey Mann, Jackson McKinnon, H.S. Naji, Danny
Peacock, Adam Scholl, and Steven Tran-Creque— some of whom I have lost touch
with, all of whom made me believe I was in the right place at the right time— and with
special thanks to Anneliese Cooper and Justin Goodman, who also helped to draft and
edit this project.  
 
To Emil and Elisabeth, who grinned and bore it. 
 
To my mother and father, who forgave everything. 
 
And to Karen Sullivan, to whom this project is dedicated, who made me want to be a
better person and scholar to the last.

Table of Contents

Introduction………………………………………………………………………………….…..1
Towards a Purer Conceptualism………………………………………………………………9
Towards a Better Conceptualism…………………………………………………………….29
Conclusions………………………………………………………………………………….…46
Works Cited………………………………………………………………………………….…48

1
Introduction
Perennial suffering has as much right to expression as a tortured man has to scream;
hence it may have been wrong to say that after Auschwitz you could no longer write
poems. But it is not wrong to raise the less cultural question whether after Auschwitz
you can go on living— especially whether one who escaped by accident, one who by
rights should have been killed, may go on living. His mere survival calls for the
coldness, the basic principle of bourgeois subjectivity, without which there could have
been no Auschwitz; this is the drastic guilt of him who was spared. By way of atonement
he will be plagued by dreams such as that he is no longer living at all.
— Theodor Adorno1
*

*

*

On March 13th of 2015, Kenneth Goldsmith performed a poem titled The Body of
Michael Brown at Interrupt 3, a conference hosted by Brown University that advertised
itself as “highlight[ing] text and/or/as image, art and/or/as language, with a particular
investment in digitally mediated language art.”2 The text of Goldsmith’s poem draws
entirely (and all but unaltered) from the Saint Louis County autopsy report prepared in
the days following Michael’s shooting by Darren Wilson, a police officer in the Ferguson,
Missouri department.3 Writing just over a year after the murder, I can already feel myself
reaching to remember learning of the first reports that an unarmed black teenager from
a majority-black town had been shot six times by a white police officer from a majoritywhite department; to remember the names of those witnesses who swore Michael had

1

Adorno, Theodor W. "Cultural Criticism and Society." Negative Dialectics. Trans. E. B. Ashton. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973. 362-363. Print.
2

“About Interrupt 3.” Interrupt 3. Brown University. Web. 14 September 2015.

3

St. Louis Dispatch Daily. “PDF: Autopsy Report for Michael Brown.” 21 October 2014. Web. 7
September 2015.
 
These documents were eventually given an official release, along with several others, in December of
2014, after a jury refused to indict Wilson. But the county autopsy was leaked in October to the St. Louis
Dispatch-Daily, and remains available on their website: http://www.stltoday.com/online/pdf-autopsy-reportfor-michael-brown/pdf_ce018d0c-5998-11e4-b700-001a4bcf6878.html.

2
died with his hands up in surrender; to remember the majority-white grand jury who
refused to indict Wilson on any charges; to remember the soldiers of the National Guard
who were sent to command posts even before the refusal to indict was announced in
order to contain the riots and burning that followed for months.4 Perhaps it will soon
prove difficult to remember even these general details because of how common this
particular narrative of police violence is now— and very well may remain— and how
many names (and bodies, and reports) were available to Goldsmith for the performance
of what he says he knew would be “a provocative gesture.”5 For now, though, it is
difficult to articulate the weight of Michael Brown’s death, and the emergency of
racialized state violence to which he gave another face. And yet we must try: for those
of us who live in white bodies, the question of how we “go on living,” as Adorno would
put it, is in large part a question of how we relate (and relate to) the narratives of crisis
belonging to people of color.
I won’t take the bait and compare this crisis to some sort of analogous one in
poetry. But I doubt it will surprise anyone, and least of all Goldsmith, that The Body of
Michael Brown was received with confusion and anger, circling in large part around the
transformation at hand, by which the report of a young black man’s murder, the anodyne
report of a killing— word and deed commissioned by the state— became the
performance of a celebrated white poet for the entertainment of a mostly white audience
at an Ivy League university language arts conference. That transformation begins with
the imposition of a poetic choice upon a legal obligation. Thus did the autopsy of

4

Bosman, Julie, and Monica Davey. "Protests Flare After Ferguson Police Officer Is Not Indicted." The
New York Times 24 November 2014. Web.
5

Wilkinson, Alec. “Something Borrowed." The New Yorker 5 October 2015. Web.

3
Michael Brown— a document whose creation depends on the mandate of the state, its
object and author serving as victim and factotum in the ongoing maintenance of that
state— become the object of a poetic “procedure” by which its “matter” and “materiality”
as language are to be exposed in the hands and voice of Goldsmith.6 The “provocative”
effect of all this is as Goldsmith says: that of “a mirror to the mechanics of our culture.”7
We are speaking, then, of a culture in which the state will condone the killing of an
unarmed man and a poet will elect to regard the program of the man’s killing as a mirror
that he might hold up to our culture— for which the poet expects, if not praise and
attention, his speaker’s fee.8 To an audience already witness to the unending television
hours and webspace dedicated to the facts (and plenty else) of Michael Brown’s story,
what else was there left to be revealed but those mechanics— the tortured man’s
scream rented out to he who was spared? Perhaps what Goldsmith forgot is that even
he who holds up a mirror has a reflection; he too lives by the mechanics of whatever
culture reflects as his backdrop. Those mechanics, by which Goldsmith arrived at
Interrupt 3 as a headline performer in the first place, are what order the cynical parallel
procedures at work— black body worked over as state enemy, black autopsy worked
over as white art— each presenting its radical imbalance in autonomy. In the absence of
any editing moves beyond the slightest of emendations, Goldsmith's “procedure”
6

Goldsmith, Kenneth. “Flarf is Dionysus. Conceptual Writing is Apollo.” Poetry July/August 2009. Web.

7

Sandhu, Sukhdev. “Kenneth Goldsmith interview: ‘I wanted to take Walter Benjamin off the pedestal and
on to the coffee table.’” The Guardian 21 November 2015. Web. 9 October 2015.
8

In response to the uproar that greeted news of his performance, Goldsmith claimed on Facebook he
would donate his speaker’s fee to Michael Brown’s family. What a charmer. 
 
For his post: Goldsmith, Kenneth. “I am requesting that Brown University not make public the recording of
my performance of ‘The Body of Michael Brown.’ There’s been too much pain for many people around
this and I do not wish to cause any more. My speaker's fee from the Interrupt 3 event will be donated to
the family of Michael Brown.” 16 March 2015. Web. 16 March 2015.

4
intercedes only insofar as it provides a human messenger— the materiality of a body
and voice in performance standing in for the state. The resemblance is unflattering.
Perhaps this parallel could have been underplayed in the hands of another poet.
But to simply call Goldsmith a “rich poet,” as Josef Kaplan memorably puts it in Kill List,
does not suggest the expanse of the space between the performer and The Body.9 For
better or for worse, Goldsmith has “received more attention lately than any other living
poet,” to hear Cathy Park Hong tell it. And in case we might mistake her comment for
one dismissing the man and his work as a passing fad, she cements: “Academia has
canonized him.” Conceptual poetry, The New Yorker tells us, may have been born of
Goldsmith and two other men talking in a bar in Buffalo— but it was Goldsmith who
became “as famous as an experimental poet usually gets” off the stuff.10 And indeed,
for a poet who sees his experiment as “fusing the avant-garde impulses of the last
century with the technologies of the present,” Goldsmith nurses that habit of formal
employment with elite institutions (Princeton, UPenn), whose most radical avances of
this century have been in the new feudalism, investing their endowments with the same
private lenders who issue debts to students— debts that have become necessary for
many to take on in the face of historic tuition increases at those same institutions.11 12
9

Kaplan, Josef. Kill List. Baltimore: Cars Are Real, 2013. 22. Print.

10

Alec Wilkinson. “Something Borrowed."

11

Kenneth Goldsmith. “Flarf is Dionysus. Conceptual Writing is Apollo.”

12

I feel it’s worth noting that not all institutions are equally elite: while Harvard and its ilk quietly take their
double dip, we are living too in a time when many public universities are being dismantled, defunded, and
subjected to the demands of a political economy all too facile to the shifting responsibility wherein
education, that public investment in ourselves, becomes education, that private venture to be paid in
debts or inheritance. 
 
If you’re interested, a good starting place for researching the double-dip endowment investment scheme
can be found here: Grim, Ryan and Shahien Nasiripoour. “Sallie Mae Profit Boosts College Endowments
And Pension Funds As Students Pay More.” The Huffington Post 9 May 2013. Web. 14 October 2015.

5
You can see where this is going by now: we are discussing a poet who gave a reading
in 2011 at the White House of a president who possesses a literal kill list, the execution
of which is entrusted to unmanned aerials— speaking of Goldsmith’s “technologies of
the present—” and the intended victims of which are almost all men of color.13 14 So
when Calvin Bedient writes that Goldsmith and his fellow Conceptualists “openly make
a bid to take over the place and honors of the [elite] institution” and their writing “ignores
the capitalist establishment as such,” we need not take his word for it.15 Goldsmith’s
literary celebrity commands an influence that sits easily with (where it does not derive
directly from) those centers of power and social control by which the state can take a life
by debts, imprisonment, or killing— all fates awaiting people of color with the greatest
frequencies. Standing above the body of Michael Brown (or in front of Brown’s projected
photograph) in his dandy’s uniform, Goldsmith conjures a practically diagrammatic
effect. Insofar as he intercedes beyond repetition of the documentation of Brown’s body
— that last step in the process by which the state takes a life— the poet cuts an
imposing, profligate figure afront all else. His dashing affect evokes neither the sobriety
of the mourner, nor the vim of the advocate, nor the dexterity of the coroner: rather, he
seeks to provoke you with his mimetic gesture into “embrac[ing] your guilty pleasure.”

13

I have deliberately avoided the president’s name here out of a desire to avoid invoking the myth of
personality that attends to that office. Here, it is only his faceless power— as commander in chief, as
executor of a kill list— that concerns me. 
 
For a video of Kenneth Goldsmith’s White House performance: Poetryfilmfestival's channel. “Kenneth
Goldsmith reads poetry at White House Poetry Night.” Online video clip.YouTube. Youtube, 12 May 2011
Web. 12 May 2011.
14

Becker, Jo, and Scott Shane. “Secret ‘Kill List’ Proves a Test of Obama’s Principles and Will.” The New
York Times 29 May 2012. Web. 29 May 2012.
15

Bedient, Calvin. “Against Conceptualism.” Boston Review 24 July 2013. Web.

6
By which he means indulging his: “your identity is not your own,” he instructs.16 By way
of his Conceptualist play, it is his. 
It’s this, er, impishness— and, yes, the signature look— that makes Goldsmith’s
claims of writing only through a thoroughly dissociated self a hard swallow. “Identity, for
one, is up for grabs,” he writes, which is perhaps a point one has to go out of his way to
make if he is a famous writer known for his extravagant physical comportment (pay no
attention to that man behind the mirror).17 But it is not a point one needs to make about
the marginalized identity of a dead eighteen-year-old whose identity was never anything
but “up for grabs.” Lest we forget: Michael Brown's presence was one that made a sixfoot-four armed police officer feel “a child” to his “Hulk Hogan,” his identity a contingent
one in a “town… characterized by deep-seated racism,” where “local authorities
targeted black residents, arresting them disproportionately and fining them excessively,”
as goes the Department of Justice report.18 19 If Goldsmith is a poet whose work
ventures the identities of those whose lives have already been ventured in the gravest
of senses, then I fear our impending arrival at the conclusion that all this was an
exercise in that “coldness” and “bourgeois subjectivity” of Adorno’s— a flourished
underlining of Kenneth Goldsmith’s “mere survival,” as well as whatever other privileges
he enjoys— a hideous subject-object mistake, an exercise of his racial privilege where
16

Kenneth Goldsmith. “Flarf is Dionysus. Conceptual Writing is Apollo.”  

 
And so we’re clear I’m not taking this quote out of context: “Flarf is Larry Rivers. Conceptual Writing is
Andy Warhol. No matter. They’re two sides of the same coin. Choose your poison and embrace your
guilty pleasure.”
17

ibid

18

Harris, Andrew, and Edvard Pettersson. “Ferguson Officer Darren Wilson Told Grand Jury He Feared
for His Life.” Bloomberg 25 November 2014. Web.
19

Halpern, Jake. “The Cop.” The New Yorker 10 August 2015. Web.

7
perhaps he had meant to expose yours— the mirror pointed the wrong way.
You see how quickly one can reach such an awful interpretation (nor did we
rush). So what I want to do in this paper is to take the temperature of this new,
Conceptual poetry. If this is a poetry that sets out to “us[e] its own subjectivity to
construct a linguistic machine that words may be poured into” and “cares little for the
outcome,” as Goldsmith has written, then it is still left to question why this political
ideology of bourgeois subjectivity, idolatry of the technological— the order of the
machine— and elitism (racial and otherwise) commands Goldsmith’s procedures.20
How did we arrive at such a machine? And can such a machine only reinscribe the force
and law of its creators, however “uncreative?”21 In this paper, we’ll work to answer these
questions by looking at the work and world of Goldsmith and his Conceptualist
contemporaries. We’ll look to some criticism and interviews as a means of working out
their stated motives, and we’ll look to some of their poems as a means of testing those
motives in process. Finally, we’ll look to creators whose work outside of the
Conceptualist scheme nonetheless elaborates where it joins in and illuminates where it
departs. My governing interests in all this are the supposedly objective procedures of
the uncreative creator, the equalizing cultural mirror of their work, and the prized literary
celebrity to which they cling that belies the whole trick. They are as apparent in The
Body of Michael Brown as they are in this quote from Vanessa Place:
Conceptualist poetry decapitates the poet. That said, we are not fools. As
Andrea Fraser has pointed out, there is no longer an institutional critique, simply
institutional relations. Kenneth Goldsmith has famously read at the White House;

20
21

Kenneth Goldsmith. “Flarf is Dionysus. Conceptual Writing is Apollo.”

“Uncreativity as a Creative Practice.” Electronic Poetry Center. University of Buffalo. 10 November
2000. Web. 16 October 2015.

8
I reasonably expect to be offered a tenured position within ten years… Still, I
would maintain that it is possible to maintain a rigorous position of disinterest—
that is to say, a stupid lack of bias. If only, as noted, because the material is so
dumb. Thus the work retains some potential for political efficacy. Or, more
properly put, retains nothing at all, but invites something.22
It would seem, then, that we are speaking of poets who are content to lose their heads
so long as they retain their crowns— poets who would ask that you excuse their lack of
apparent political efficacy with respect to the advocacy of those who risk more than their
authorial necks as part of some critical central abdication of traditional conventions of
authorship on their part. The disparity piques: where Michael Brown gave  
 
his mortal life, “All we poets stand to lose is a rarified sense of ourselves,” says Place.
Indeed— that is all. To be blunt: these are enemies of mastery, but not power. Theirs is
an art that perhaps, its creators muse, might “invite something—” a politically efficacious
action, even— but more probably tenure. Call it bourgeoise oblige or grave robbing or
an infinite offense playbook based off a single hermeneutic pump fake. We’ll have time
for all that here. But don’t mistake the poets for “fools.” Though their “lack of bias” be
“stupid,” they know how to throw the rock, hide their hand, and pass the buck without
the writing of a single word.

22

Place, Vanessa. “‘Notes on Conceptualisms’: A dialogue between Vanessa Place and Tania
Ørum.”Jacket 2 22 February 2012 — 22 June 2012. Web. 13 August 2015.

9
Towards a Purer Conceptualism
These days of disinheritance, we feast
On human heads. True, birds rebuild
Old nests and there is blue in the woods.
The church bells clap one night in the week.
But that’s all done. It is what used to be…
… This bitter meat
Sustains us… Who, then, are they, seated here? 
Is the table a mirror in which they sit and look? 
Are they men eating reflections of themselves?
— Wallace Stevens23
What is the robbing of a bank compared to the founding of a bank?
— Bertolt Brecht24
*

*

*

I’d like to start by tucking into Notes on Conceptualisms, a 2009 book by
Vanessa Place and Rob Fitterman that offers itself in its foreword as “a collection of
notes, aphorisms, quotes and inquiries on conceptual writing.”25 From the outset, then,
this little hornbook and its aggregate quality do not insist upon a sense of totality; its
“collect[ed]” parts may very well be worth as much as their sum. For our purposes, all
the better: my interests here are in a few aspects of Place/ Fitterman’s project that don’t
constitute an exhaustive review of Conceptual poetry so much as they offer an
introduction to the poetic and political attitudes of its creators. But for a critical entry to
thinking about Conceptualism, we could do worse in terms of authoritative clout:

23

Stevens, Wallace. “Cuisine Bourgeoisie.” The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens. New York: Vintage
Books, 1990. 227. Print.
24

Brecht, Bertolt. The Threepenny Opera. Trans. Desmond Vesey. New York: Grove Press, 1960. 92.
Print.
25

Fitterman, Robert, and Vanessa Place. Notes on Conceptualisms. Brooklyn: Ugly Duckling Presse,
2009. 1. Web.

10
besides Place and Fitterman, Notes references Goldsmith’s writing a few places, and
includes an appendix of Conceptualist poetry that includes the works of all three, as well
as well-known collaborators Christian Bök, Tan Lin— the two other men in that bar in
Buffalo— Caroline Bergvall, Jen Bervin, and a host of others.26 We’ll get to the poetry
itself in good time, but asking what the poets make of their work— in its “concept” and
“practice,” as the two are designated— seems as fair a place to start our inquiry as I can
figure. Still, my interest in Conceptualist poetry began in doubt about its ends— are
these poets bank robbers or bank founders? Or could they be both?— and suffice it to
say I found what I suspected. As I’ll work to show here, Notes’ inclusive, democratic
approach and its putative concern for an “affirmatively anti-institutional” “concept”
becoming, “in practice,” “a new institutionalism” is betrayed by its consideration of the
“pure” and the “impure” Conceptualism.27 Place/ Fitterman’s clear preoccupation with
this pure/ impure distinction and its centrality to Conceptual poetry results in their
boldest and most prescriptive claims— the wolf hiding in the shearling coat of their antiinstitutional power-sharing vocabulary and their disassociated “I.” On the apparent selfacquittal of the latter is the former snuck in, with motives that only make an explicit
appearance later. No need to be credulous: as we have seen, there is good reason to
question the “potential for political efficacy” of this art and the “rigorous position of
disinterest” on the part of its creators where power is concerned.
Kudos nevertheless to Place and Fitterman: their charming democratic tone is
rather smartly wrought, starting with the foreword in which Notes on Conceptualism is

26
27

Place/ Fitterman, p 75-78.

The designation of concept and practice, as well as some discussion of the pure and impure
Conceptualisms can be found on page 53 among many, many places.

11
framed as “far from a definitive text and much closer to a primer, a purposefully
incomplete starting place, where readers, we hope, can enter so as to participate in the
shaping of these ideas: to add, subtract, multiply.”28 This credo offers a sense of
participatory “incomplete[ness]” and multiplicity, those plural “Conceptualisms” of the
title allowing for the proposal and cropping up of diverse and coincident interpretations.
The architecture of the book’s main text is structured accordingly: Notes’ arguments
come shaped as numbered points divvied up into lettered subsections, the order of
which is marked by silent subtractions. So while 4a. neatly follows 4., what comes next
is 5a.— there is no 5. Later, 6. is followed by 6b1.— there is no 6a.29 The irregular
deleting rhythm continues throughout, and would seem to constitute the “constraint”
method from Conceptual poetry’s kitty of moves; as laid out in the foreword, these are
“allegory, appropriation, piracy, flarf, identity theft, sampling, [and] constraint.”30 These
absences (or redactions), along with the long blanks between the numbered points,
leave literal and imagined space for the reader to accept the invitation to “participate—”
a critical looseness at the joints. This is Notes’ persuasive democratic bent at its best:
insofar as it calls its reader to “add, subtract, multiply,” and otherwise intervene upon the
Conceptualist practice, the reader is first invited to understand the authors’ take on it. So
by the time Place/ Fitterman broach the more prescriptive terms of their Notes, they
seem at first only to be indulging you with an offer, which you could return in the space
provided for you.
But for all of Notes’ generosity of tone and form at the fore, the participatory
28

Place/ Fitterman, p 1.

29

ibid, p 25-36.

30

ibid, p 12.

12
humor is hard to keep up— some Notes remain plainly more difficult to freely interpret,
much less subtract from, than others. We can look deep into 3b. where, set off by
double space on each side, Place/ Fitterman offer that “Failure is the goal of conceptual
writing.”31 Place/ Fitterman seem here to build on the earlier note 1a. in which they write
that Conceptualism, as a form of allegory, “builds to an Idea. Images coagulate around
the idea—” a point offered to distinguish Conceptualism from symbolism, which “derives
from an idea.” The concept of failure is introduced at that point as the better part of
valor: “Note the premise of failure, of unutterability, of exhaustion before one’s begun.”32
Fair enough— if the Conceptualist poem seeks to “assume all context” whereby it will
create “a narrative mediation between figure and meaning,” the observation of the
incredible work of the work— the impossible rain barrel required— seems earned and
responsible.33 In 3b., we proceed well beyond that observation. It goes without saying
that stating a modal goal is the very opposite of clearing “a purposefully incomplete
starting place.” By introducing this abstract negative, while not yet constituting a
wholesale methodology unto itself, Place/ Fitterman clearly set their sights upon Notes’
more prescriptive Conceptualist paradigm as the reader learns that failure is not simply
the “premise” of the Conceptual poem— that incomplete starting place— but the goal
too. Place/ Fitterman’s Conceptualism would thus seem to draw an equal sign between
their procedures’ beginnings and ends, hinting at the idea of the “readymade” poem to
come, which looks the same before and after its poetic interpretation with the exception,
perhaps, of something “unutterabl[e].” For now, though, let’s content ourselves with a
31

Place/ Fitterman, p 24.

32

ibid, p 16.

33

ibid, p 25.

13
smaller point: that whatever one might build in or subtract from Notes— whatever
“narrative mediation” the poem locates “between figure and meaning” in the
Conceptualist poem— there is a failure to which the poem must add up.34 The poem
must mediate, the mediation must fail, and the room for subtraction from (or more aptly
here, addition to) Notes’ Conceptualisms shrinks.
Perhaps the abstract negative is a wide enough space that the reader doesn’t yet
feel some encroachment— after all, perhaps mediation fails, but something else can
come of those coagulated images. But the order to fail returns in force at the tail-end of
5a.:
Note: these are strategies of failure.
Note: failure in this sense acts as an assassination of mastery.
Note: failure in this sense serves to irrupt the work, violating it from within.
Note: this invites the reader to redress failure, hallucinate repair.35
And so it is here that Place/ Fitterman plot their poetic and political paradigm in rather
more unsparingly prescriptive terms. The gentle suggestiveness of all these “note[s]” is
here broken. Rather than charitably reminding the reader of the authors’ ideas, the
repeating note— note— note— is a rhythmic dictation, a euphemized instruction:
commit this to memory. The reader will note that the Conceptualist failure is manifold,
yes— but highly specific. The Conceptualist poem should fail the expectations of the
“readership or thinkership.”36 This failure should constitute a refusal— indeed, a cold
blood assassination— of the reader/ thinker’s expectations of mastery, as well as their
34

Place/ Fitterman, p 16.

35

ibid, p 27. I’ve retained the spacing.

36

ibid, p 27, emphasis theirs.

14
expectations of the appropriated work— expectations of the original work both poetic
(as in that “narrative mediation between figure and meaning,” disturbed or disturbingly
reframed) and political (as in its identity, now thieved). These two failures orient the
Conceptualist poem towards a final intervention upon the reader/ thinker’s expectations
themselves. Thus emerges a formal failure with stakes so particular as to launch a
program of readership or thinkership from which Place/ Fitterman provide little room for
deviation— a procedure not only for writing the Conceptual, but reading and thinking it
too. Place/ Fitterman hand down this Conceptualist premise, goal, and hermeneutic: the
reader/thinker is called to an awareness of their expectations, studies the procedures of
those expectations’ failure by “irrupt[ion]” and “violati[on],” and, through received
imaginings as irrepressible and accidental as “hallucinat[ions],” finds herself back at,
well, another “purposefully incomplete starting place—” a repaired or regenerated state
after the master, the masterpiece, and mastery itself. “Note the desire to begin again,”
Place/ Fitterman ask of the reader.37 But how does one note this projected desire
without simply adopting it? When Place/ Fitterman wrote that Notes is a place “where
readers, we hope, can enter,” how did they hope we could enter their own desires
without sublimating our own? And lest we begin to wonder whether all this procedure is
perhaps more innocently descriptive than it is puzzlingly prescriptive, ask yourself if you,
the reader/ thinker, followed this program in considering The Body of Michael Brown.
Did you note a desire to begin again? Did you hallucinate a poetic or political repair? 
Obviously enough, I did not— the only assassination I “hallucinated” was Michael
Brown’s, which hardly seems to “irrupt” the work of an autopsy. And so excluded from

37

Place/ Fitterman, p 22.

15
Place/ Fitterman’s procedures of readership/ thinkership, I too found their introduction of
another distinction, that of the “open” and “closed” Conceptualism, to similarly fail the
anti-institutional, anti-foundational habit they want claim to. Notes’ hermeneutic
paradigm, insofar as it seeks a very specific irruption and shift in the expectations of the
reader/ thinker, seems to me decidedly closed, and the fact that Place/ Fitterman feel a
need to clarify that some Conceptualist poetry allows for “multiple meanings” already
implies that some does not. But if the work “retains nothing,” as Place has put it, and
seeks to invite the reader/ thinker’s “hallucination—” a description that brings to mind
the involuntary, the received, the subconscious— I am at pains to square that with any
sort of closed system of meaning. Nonetheless the reader finds in 7a2. that:
Open conceptual writing is typically open horizontally: there are multiple
readings, but not multiple meanings or levels of reading. In this sense, it may be
somewhat closed.
Closed conceptual writing typically attempts to limit its possible readings through
some overt articulation or inscription. Closed conceptual writing is open vertically:
fewer possible readings, but multiple meanings or levels of reading. In this sense,
it is somewhat open.38
The idea here is that the Conceptualist poem either “renders the object” of the original
work open or closed, so long as we accept that what is open is somewhat closed and
what is closed is somewhat open. Got that? This, despite the fact that if we accept
Place/ Fitterman’s prescriptive readership/ thinkership, we have already imposed “limits”
of interpretation; those “multiple meanings or levels of reading” are to be gathered or
hallucinated through the authors’ own “overt articulation or inscription” of a critical
reading/ thinking procedure. If we are seeking Place/ Fitterman’s specific failures in the

38

Place/ Fitterman, p 38.

16
work and in ourselves, then, there goes the “open,” and along with it the disinheritance
of mastery.
I admit that I am also baffled by the difference between “horizontal” and “vertical”
readings— without further elaboration or explanation, Place/ Fitterman’s “meanings or
levels of reading” are difficult to locate. They must constitute some hermeneutic
possibility beyond that which is offered in “multiple readings—” this much is clear from
the syntax— but given the specificity of the procedures of readership/ thinkership
proposed so far, the suddenly vague phrasing of these metaphorical “levels” (if they are
metaphorical) thwart my ideas about reading more than they liberate. I find myself at the
whim of Place/ Fitterman: are they referring to the various expectations a Conceptualist
poem can interrupt? The various social worlds in which the poem can be read? Neither
the irony nor the headache of this struggle is lost on me. Here, Place/ Fitterman seek to
distinguish between two Conceptualisms that allow two modes of meaning— and yet
the authors’ phrasing is so oblique that I find myself straining towards any mode of
meaning that they might, well, mean. No help elsewhere in Notes, where “horizontal”
and “vertical” appear only in literal reference to visual art— horizontal as in a horizon—
except for one instance in which Place/ Fitterman call the reader to:
Too, consider the materiality, horizontal and vertical, of the words themselves.
The double-aught or emptied eyesockets stuck in the middle of “gloom” and
“doom,” the heave in Heaven and god’s huff in Hell. The clutch of objects you
work with— those cones and squares and cylinders which may be letters that
compose words or pictures that refer to words—are evidence of your creation
and its reception. 39
It’s all very sexy, this huffing and heaving and old time religion, but horizontal and

39

Place/ Fitterman, p 68.

17
vertical are nonetheless terms of decidedly visual stakes here; it is hard to reconcile the
sensual peaks and valleys they describe with the rather more discursive import offered
by the idea of horizontally or vertically open readings. As an aside, this passage did little
to persuade me of Place/ Fitterman’s governing interest in the materiality of words,
either— that other, anti-institutional devaluation in which words are objects, about which
the reader should “Note that Conceptualism maintains only the concept of ‘is’ (e.g.
materiality or other invocation) is permanent.”40 Schools of thought die, but the
sensuous heave and huff of their letters seem to live on here: vive matérialité. I am
decidedly unconvinced of this proposed permanence of materiality— the one concept
that permanently “is—” given that we are discussing the construction of a Conceptualist
linguistic machine that can gather, delete, and replace words of an original text to create
a new text. Strategies such as flarf and constraint do not destroy materiality— they still
need ink— but they do alter its textures and structures. Do these alterations not present
a threat to a text’s material permanence? I’m reminded of the old philosophic
conundrum: if Argo is repaired during the course of Jason’s quest for the Golden
Fleece, and if it is repaired board by board so that all the boards are replaced by the
end of the voyage, then what is Argo? The “clutch of objects you work with” is
rearranged— materiality violated, evidence of creation or reception tainted— while only
your perception of materiality remains permanent.
To return to the “open” and “closed” Conceptualisms, Place/ Fitterman come
closest to explaining their difference by simply laying the two against another distinction
worth our attention— that of the “pure” and “impure” Conceptualism:

40

Place/ Fitterman, p 38.

18
Note: when the word is the wound (the site of failure), there are two extreme
forms of mimetic redress: isolate and seal the word/wound (pure conceptualism),
or open and widen the word/wound (impure conceptualism and the baroque).41
 
While this would seem to refer back to the open and closed Conceptualisms as
describing two different modes of meaning, Place/ Fitterman’s introduction of the image
of the wound “rendered” further open or closed sets the motif alight. It fits easily with the
vocabulary already established: the “site of failure” here would seem to refer to the
found or seized text— “the word—” which Place/ Fitterman seek to violate from within,
exposing that broken mediation between figure and meaning, all the while interrupting
the master. To seal that broken mediation by appropriation is to close the wound— the
application of some sort of transparent bandage through which the wound is still visible
but undeniably dressed. To open the wound by baroque play is to exploit its broken
figure/ meaning mediation even further— to twist the scalpel to make one’s point. I still
can’t tell you what a horizontal or a vertical reading is— it seems to me that the open
and closed distinction refers more to the Conceptual poet’s procedures than to the
number or modes of reading available to the reader/ thinker, the latter of which Place/
Fitterman seem all too eager to curtail and predetermine— but drawing from the pure/
impure distinction, Place/ Fitterman find a clear, if modified use for the open/ closed
one.
Place/ Fitterman’s clearest politic finds shape from this pure/ impure distinction
as well. To that end, let’s dwell for a moment on those “site” texts, already wounded
when found. The Conceptualist failure will play their remedy, yes, and that “site of
failure,” then, is the site of operation, metaphorically and literally. Thus the wound exists

41

Place/ Fitterman, p 57.

19
before it is becomes the site of the poetic procedure, recalling that “premise of failure.”
And yet it is in the consideration of the pure and the impure Conceptualism that Place/
Fitterman articulate the nature of this woundedness in a political sense, doubling up on
the poetic aspect of its broken figure/ meaning mediation. Here we find Place/ Fitterman
at their sharpest: 
In a culture where objects are already devalued by their commodification, an
allegorical relationship to the art object (or text) further highlights the process of
devaluation.
One might argue that devaluation is now a traditional/canonical aim of
contemporary art. Thus there is now great value in devaluation.
Culture is a paradoxical commodity. So completely is it subject to the law of
exchange that it is no longer exchanged; it is so blindly consumed in use that it
can no longer be used.
Conceptual writing proposes two end-point responses to this paradox by way of
radical mimesis: pure conceptualism and the baroque. Pure conceptualism
negates the need for reading in the traditional textual sense—one does not need
to “read” the work as much as think about the idea of the work. In this sense,
pure conceptualism’s readymade properties capitulate to and mirror the easy
consumption/ generation of text and the devaluation of reading in the larger
culture. Impure conceptualism, manifest in the extreme by the baroque,
exaggerates reading in the traditional textual sense. In this sense, its excessive
textual properties refuse, and are defeated by, the easy consumption/generation
of text.42
It’s a fat quotation, I know, but I relish Place/ Fitterman’s clarity, and this passage makes
clear these two modes of Conceptualist redress as separate “end-points,” wherein “the
baroque is one end of the Conceptual spectrum, and pure appropriation the other.”43
Before we discuss why Place/ Fitterman place these two procedures on their respective
ends of an axis, I must draw attention to force of the vocabulary. It turns out that, if

42

Place/ Fitterman, p 26-27.

43

ibid, p 18.

20
Place and Fitterman are poets for whom riddles like “What is the principle of the
unprincipled?” and its follow-up, “Are we left then with only principals?” reside in a
decidedly rhetorical and unanswerable register, they are still poets for whom no less a
measure than “pur[ity]” will do for the description of their poetic method.44 They don’t
malign the impure Conceptualism (in short, any Conceptualist poetry that involves
exercise on the part of its creator beyond excision and repetition of a seized text— so
for example, writing), no— but to call those strategies impure makes clear which
practices come closest to the authors’ governing preoccupations and their pure
interpretation, and which practices only rhyme with those preoccupations on their way
towards different ends. This identification of two “end[s] of the Conceptual spectrum”
employs the pure/ impure distinction at the service of Place/ Fitterman’s previous note
that there are “end-points to any spectrum and infinite points between them.45 How one
defines the end-points and the points in between instructs how one defines Conceptual
writing.”46 This defining Conceptualist distinction, then, is an imbalanced spectrum; it
proceeds in points that move outwards on an axis— from a center towards its
dissipation— from the essential to, eventually, the unrecognizable and the disowned.
Place/ Fitterman might muddy your understanding of the horizontal and the vertical on
their way here, but when they find time to define their two Conceptualisms in terms of
each one’s allegiance to the putatively central political and poetic concerns at stake,
Notes’ rhetoric finds its divining rod and ground to push into.
So what is divined? The “pure” Conceptualist poem is that which “seals the
44

Place/ Fitterman, p 53.

45

ibid, p 18.

46

ibid, p 23.

21
wound” of commodification and devaluation by devaluing the seized or “readymade” text
a second time— a fate sealed as much as a wound. This is the mode in which The
Body of Michael Brown was created, a poem that draws unreadability— that “negate[d]
need for reading in the traditional textual sense—” from the materiality of its opaque
bureaucratic language, and seeks instead to focus upon the social context— those
mechanics of culture— in which language occurs: a “mirror” to “the easy consumption/
generation of text.” The reversals at play are many: where one finds the mark of the
master in the “traditional text,” one instead finds facelessness in the pure Conceptualist
poem. Where one finds success in the “traditional text” is indeed the same place where
the pure Conceptualist poem finds its site of failure— a wound requiring attention.
But here’s the rub: these reversals reveal the wound that most concerns Place/
Fitterman is not the disjunction between, say, the state and the citizen— the
anesthetized coroner’s jargon inscribed upon a hot body gone cold in the street— but
that between master and masterpiece. This is the figure/ meaning relation Place/
Fitterman seek to rawly expose, and we can be sure of this because the pure
Conceptualism is that which seeks first and foremost “to capitulate to and mirror the
easy consumption/ generation of text and the devaluation of reading in the larger culture
—” to “decapitalize literature,” and to “decapitate the poet” as Place has put it
elsewhere.47 At its purest, then, the Conceptualist poem does away with writing
altogether— in the name of disinheriting the master, the imposition of any “overt
articulation or inscription” on the part of the poet is done away with, and so too is the
necessity of reading negated. Thus Place/ Fitterman’s insistence on a thinkership— one

47

Vanessa Place. “‘Notes on Conceptualisms’: A dialogue between Vanessa Place and Tania Ørum.”

22
need only understand that Place/ Fitterman seek to dismember any “rarified sense of
[them]selves” as poets to embark on their hermeneutic procedure. If the original text
survives the procedure at all, it is only because of its materiality— the fact that it takes
up space that can then be appropriated for Place/ Fitterman’s execution of any prized
notion of the creator and the creation— the former naive if not delusional, the latter
doomed to cultural commodification and devaluation anyway. Rather than seeking to
defend poetry against this commodification and devaluation, then, the pure
Conceptualism accepts defeat, and responds to that which it objects by repurposing the
traditionally unpoetic as a “readymade” mirror, held up as if to say: I know what I am, but
what are you?
This is why Notes employs a vocabulary and syntax that leaves room for the
reader: it would be unbecoming of poets who claim that there is nothing “rarified” about
poets— indeed, that they should be “decapitated—” to admit they have programmed a
hermeneutic procedure at least as prescriptive as what you might hear from those
sworn protectors of “the snowflake self of the lyric” that Place scorns.48 Place/ Fitterman
claim they want only to hold up the mirror, leaving the responsibility of what you might
see there to you— and yet they, like Goldsmith, seem to have forgotten their reflections
and the mechanics of culture that govern not just readers and thinkers but poets, too.
This mild hypocrisy could be overlooked if Place/ Fitterman’s assassination of
mastery and their response to cultural commodification and devaluation came by way of
an assassination of masters— those writers who capitalize and capitalize on literature in
the most conventional, commodified, and canonical of senses. What of the work of the

48

Vanessa Place. “‘Notes on Conceptualisms’: A dialogue between Vanessa Place and Tania Ørum.”

23
very guardians of master and masterpiece? That these figures do not feature in any
Conceptual poetry I can find is certainly not for want of options. Hothead one-trick
misogynist Bukowski and the ugly fetishizing mythology of his alcoholic glory still sell; at
the time of this writing, a quick glance at Amazon turns up six unique titles of his in the
hundred top-selling books of American poetry— more than any other poet.49 Or what of
those self-appointed appointers? Take Harold Bloom, a sexual predator whose
Shakespearean exceptionalism and Freudian revisionism— his being a “literary history
and cultural tradition as a titanic struggle between forbidding patriarchs and their virile, if
tormented, masculine progeny,” as Asha Varadharajan puts it— won him a job for life as
one of Yale’s no-more-than-forty Sterling Professors, a position that takes its name from
a corporate lawyer who made his representing the likes of Jay Gould, Henry Ford, and
Standard Oil.50 What about their authority, their self-aggrandizing, their commercialism
and colonialism, their racist, sexist, and classist campaigns in which letters and poetry
are made to serve such ugly gods and masters? Why do these writers and their work
evade the glare of the Conceptualist mirror? Does the work not exhibit the symptoms of
the wound— the figure/ meaning relationship not just broken but gone corrupt— the
devaluation of letters for the sake of valorizing the myth of their masters?
That these questions go unanswered would seem to arise from the view that
Place attributes to Andrea Fraser: “there is no longer an institutional critique, simply

49

“Best Sellers in American Poetry.” Amazon. 12 November 2015. Web. 12 November 2015.

50

I can’t imagine I need to offer evidence of Harold Bloom’s many laurels and infamies, but I quite like the
article by Asha Varadharajan, whose citation I’ll give here:
Varadharajan, Asha. "The Unsettling Legacy Of Harold Bloom's ‘Anxiety Of Influence.’" Modern Language
Quarterly 69.4 (2008): 461-480. Academic Search Premier. Web. 1 Dec. 2015.

24
institutional relations.”51 This neutrality (if not indifference) towards those institutions and
officiants entrusted with guarding the canon and its ideologies of the powerful is indeed
part of the pure Conceptualism, whose strategy is purely “to capitulate and mirror.”
Perhaps this is how we should interpret the provenance of the name, borrowed from
those visual artists whose “militant intention was to defy the galleries and collectors, the
capitalists of art,” as Calvin Bedient puts it.52 Notes on Conceptualisms offers us a
manual of going through their motions, sure— there’s a rhyme between Goldsmith
reading traffic reports at the White House and Duchamp attempting to install a urinal at
The Grand Central Palace in New York wherein the devalued, readymade art is a
shared medium. But for the Conceptual poets, who have no choice but to acknowledge
that “devaluation is now a traditional /canonical aim of contemporary art,” only the
concept of a radical devaluation— and not its anti-institutional politic— remains. These
poets are instead Wallace Stevens’ men eating reflections of themselves, chasing only
their own tails with a mirror, for whom power and the church bell’s clap one night in the
week are but institutional relations to which we should acclimate. Pay no attention to
that man behind the mirror, for he is not the master.
So uninterested in the distracting politics of oppression and unwilling too to give
up on decapitalization via devaluation as their signature move, these Conceptualist
poets could have always stuck to traffic reports and transcribing ordinary time editions
of the New York Times as Goldsmith once did.And yet not even this sort of uncreative
practice has proved enough for Conceptualism’s adultes terribles: as Goldsmith has put

51

Vanessa Place. “‘Notes on Conceptualisms’: A dialogue between Vanessa Place and Tania Ørum.”

52

Calvin Bedient. “Against Conceptualism.”

25
it, “I actually stopped being a boring writer almost a decade ago when I got bored of
being boring… I stopped being boring and wanted to find hotter and more emotional
texts.”53 Thus Vanessa Place’s Miss Scarlet, in which she transcribes the minstrel’s
patois of Gone with the Wind’s most pitiful creation, a dizzy and ignorant slave called
Prissy. And thus too The Body of Michael Brown: these texts are “hot” and “emotional”
insofar as they constitute representations of black narratives and black bodies in which
each is destroyed to serve a white supremacist state — its revisionist pastoral fantasies
and its regime of violence, respectively. But the Conceptualist intervention holds these
texts hostage, emotional and political implications and all, only to prove that its own
poetic master is dead. Put another way, the Conceptualist poem renounces its own
master, but steps around the toes of yours.
That those other masters are more cruel is simply that which ensures the
Conceptualist poem’s vitality, borrowed from crises of racialized violence or whatever
else might be “hotter and more emotional” than crises of poetry. “Identity is up for
grabs,” the poet might offer in defense. But that decentered Conceptualist self would
then seem to emerge as some sublime elite white self, for whom the ethnic self plays
the unmediated body. “I have stolen Margaret Mitchell’s ‘niggers’ and claim them as my
own,” writes Place, to “set them in a block of text, a slave block—to remind white folks
of their goings-on and ongoings.”54 The ambiguity as to the role of the quotation marks
around the slur weighs heavy here— is Place claiming the material word, the emotional
and political narratives to which they belong, or black bodies themselves? The power to

53

Moss, Jeremiah. “Goldsmith’s Capital.” Jeremiah’s Vanishing New York. Blogspot. Blogspot 10
November 2015. Web. 10 November 2015.
54

Place, Vanessa. “Artist’s Statement.” Drunken Boat. Drunken Boat. Web. 10 November 2015.

26
collapse the three— to reinscribe the uninterrupted history of oppression to which they
belong by mirroring— is the pure Conceptualism at its ugliest and, well, purest. To that
end, the poem establishes the Conceptualist poet as hero of individualism and
technology— she who constructs the linguistic mirror machine that assassinates
mastery, that assumes all context— a cogito levitating freely above the racial mob,
whose hot and emotional toil either amuses or bores her— and who calls death a living.
There is another disheartening possibility— that the amorality of these poets who
“have nothing to lose but a rarified sense of [them]selves” is some sort of deliberate
challenge— a race to the bottom. Place has said she seeks to create “radically evil”
poetry; perhaps, then, the decapitation of the master is to be achieved by a selfdestruction of reputation.55 On a body of work that pops racial terror memorabilia in the
postmodern microwave, Vanessa Place seeks tenure, while Kenneth Goldsmith is
publishing an unreadable 1000-page gilded coffee table book called Capital that retails
for $49.95 and The New Yorker tells us it “gives you the feel of what it is like to be living
in New York now.”56 (I bet.) To call the Conceptualist poet out on this would be passé, or
else miss the interruption of your expectation of critique— a hypocrisy rephrased in
Notes’ paradigm as simply part of its procedure of reading and thinking. The
Conceptualist practice is that which finds its wound of commodification and devaluation
before sealing, preserving, and sending it off to reside within those institutions of capital
and power the artists of its namesake despised. It is in the name of renouncing anything
“rarified” or admirable about themselves or their work that the Conceptualist poets join

55

Calvin Bedient. “Against Conceptualism.”

56

Alec Wilkinson. “Something Borrowed.”

27
the industrial complex, and defy you to be so dull as to argue that they’re wielding their
power hideously— their disassociated identity as disinherited responsibility. 
As we have seen, the hermeneutic procedures set out in Notes sit all too easily
with these ends— ends which extend narratives of racial crisis more than they tarnish
them, which have the airs of a post- or anti-institutional politic and vocabulary while
disavowing the political and poetic tool required and available for political efficacy. That
the poetic strategies and stakes Place/ Fitterman plot for themselves and other
Conceptual poets did not have to lead to such a disturbing ideology seems a point worth
making. But that they did puts Place’s supposed “rigorous position of disinterest” to the
test— her “stupid lack of bias,” that is. As the cliché goes, power blinds, and perhaps
the privileges of living in a white body or even the quiet fame belonging to experimental
poets like Goldsmith and Place— “respectively the court jester and law-giver, the brand
manager and ideologue, of Conceptual Poetry,” as Ken Chen has put it— have
convinced them that their own Conceptualisms check out, and that the material upon
which it seeks to act really does await them dumb and failed.57 This critical reversal of
Adorno— by which the tortured man’s scream is imagined as silent, unmediated, a
premise of failure that must be interrupted and acted upon— betrays a decided bias,
and a rigorous position of disinterest only with respect to the power of others, or lack
thereof. We are indeed “left then with only principals,” whose procedures and
preoccupations present perhaps the most serious flaw in Notes on Conceptualisms’
argument: insofar as these poems relate to the narratives of crisis belonging to people

57

Chen, Ken. “Authenticity Obsession, or Conceptualism as Minstrel Show.” Asian American Writer’s
Workshop. 11 June 2015. Web. 1 November 2015.

28
of color, they do not fail my expectations at all.

Note: Perhaps Josef Kaplan had it right. Some names belong on a list.

 

 

29
Towards a Better Conceptualism
…
Was, da ein solcher, Ewiger, war, mißtraun wir
immer dem Irdischen noch? Statt am vorläufigen ernst
die Gefühle zu lernen für welche
Neigung, künftig im Raum?
*
…
Why, after such a life, Eternal, do we go on
mistrusting the earthly? Instead of from provisional things
ardently learning the feeling for who knows
what inclination, awaiting us in space?
— Rainer Maria Rilke58
*

*

*

All right— take a breath. I will, at least; it doesn’t give me great joy to provoke
such righteous vigor in myself. But this project began in righteous doubt of Goldsmith
and Place’s poetry, and a desire to work out that doubt through a consideration of their
own words and theories. To that end, I feel satisfied— but I have never forgotten that
their Conceptualism is not the only one, and that many poets employing similar linguistic
strategies and perhaps even similar poetics do not wink so menacingly at others’
narratives of crisis. Notes on Conceptualisms may propose a more institutional and
prescriptive paradigm of writing, reading, and thinking than Place/ Fitterman want to
admit, but it also allows for more than the ugly ideologies that made it famous— for one,
we have barely considered the practice of impure Conceptualism yet. So that is what
this chapter is for— a reconciliation after the scourge. Here we will consider those other

58

Rilke, Rainer Maria. “To Höldernin.” Uncollected Poems. Trans. Edward Snow. Ed. Edward Snow. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997. 107. Print.

30
Conceptualisms, as well as some work by poets who do not consider themselves
Conceptual poets, but whose work can guide our reading of Conceptual poetry insofar
as their moves and motives coincide with and diverge from those set out by Place/
Fitterman and the other Conceptualist poets referenced in Notes on Conceptualisms. I
am still unconvinced of certain aspects of Notes’ hermeneutic, and I’ll be sure to note
those instances in which my own reading and thinking diverges from Place/ Fitterman’s
paradigm, but I am not setting out to (further) disavow Notes. Instead, I here seek only
to accept Place/ Fitterman’s invitation to add, subtract, and multiply the possibilities of
Conceptual poetry— to play in the blank space offered to me, the reader/ thinker.
I’d like to start with Jen Bervin’s Nets, a cycle of poems in which Shakespeare’s
sonnets are “stripped… to make the space of the poems open, porous, possible — a
divergent elsewhere. When we write poems, the history of poetry is with us, preinscribed in the white of the page.”59 This is achieved by the reprinting the selection of
“stripped” words marked in dark type. They look like this:60

59

http://jacketmagazine.com/25/metr-berv.html

60

Conjunctions

31
In the printed book, the poems appear only in the format of the image on the left, the
original text still visible, if faintly. But I quite like how these poems are published on
Conjunctions’ web presence, where toggling your cursor over the original sonnet “strips”
it, leaving you with the image on the right. That there is no explanation offered for the
words dropping away from you is even better— insofar as the poetic procedure
interrupts the reader/ thinker’s expectation of the sonnet, it surprises her with the
agency to ravel and unravel the poem, the first time by accident.
Obviously enough, some of the procedural vocabulary from Notes is helpful in
discussing Nets, and the work is specifically addressed in the book. Place/ Fitterman
write:
Bervin subtracts the master from his masterpiece, author from authority…
Note: Bervin’s gesture is more like Rauschenberg’s erasure of de Kooning’s
painting in leaving the presence of the absence, than it is like Duchamp’s
proposed Rembrandt-as-ironing board.
Note to what degree the authorial framing of text as art removes aesthetic control
from the reader.61
There are a couple of points here with which I’ll take issue. The first is the note that
Bervin’s procedure subtracts the master from the masterpiece, her selective strokes the
sort of emendations that constitute that impure Conceptualism. I disagree— if anything,
the procedure seems to me to provide another reading of the canonical sonnet that only
refreshes the work and its creator. Or as Paul Auster puts it: “Jen Bervin has reimagined
Shakespeare as our true contemporary.” Following Auster, I’m of the mind that insofar
as Bervin locates a new poem within Shakespeare’s original, her work reframes the text

61

Place/ Fitterman, p 31.

32
as a contemporary one in the direction of recovering and reinscribing its author’s legacy
and relevance. Thus does the poem retain Shakespeare’s structure, the words stripped
away providing invisible (or simply faded) scaffolding to those that remain, “the
presence of [some] absence” of text or master offering not so much a hermeneutic
subtraction as it does an alternate reading, in light of which the original text is
elaborated upon. The sonnet becomes a net, truncated but allowing, as a net does, for
the reader/ thinker to catch and collect beyond their grasp.
This is all the more apparent if one compares Bervin’s text with the entire original
from which Bervin’s newly divided “parts” indeed strike a new and “speechless” song,
“each in each by mutual ordering.” The original text’s image of “sire and child and happy
mother” joining in unison makes literal the poetic heritage both local (as in this one
poem) and historical (as in the Shakespearean sonnet tradition); insofar as “her little
poems sing,” as Auster puts it, they sing along: a “true concord of well-tuned sounds.” In
fact, the text of the original can even be read as a direct rebuke to Place/ Fitterman’s
reading:
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering…
Indeed, Place/ Fitterman seem “chide[d]” and chafed by the master/ masterpiece
relation. The sonnet would direct them instead to appreciate the “mutual ordering—”
that of the original and the subtracted, appreciable together and apart, each giving new
shape to the other. Bervin’s own comment gets at this too: in writing that “When we
write poems, the history of poetry is with us, pre-inscribed in the white of the page;

33
when we read or write poems, we do it with or against this palimpsest.” Nets is thus no
rejoinder to but rather an acknowledgement of our inescapable complicity with a history
of masters. And if its poems sing, they sing a song that while “seeming one” is actually
“being many.” The layers of that palimpsest are both literal and metaphorical: to strip
away the sonnet is to reveal the netting beneath, the preinscription that is the premise of
reading and writing poetry. Rather than proposing to tear open or seal the opening her
found texts have made in the world as Place/ Fitterman do, Bervin seeks to “to make
the space of the poems open, porous, possible, a divergent elsewhere—” to inspect the
infinite tiny openings a text makes in our reading and thinking lives, and to invite the
reader to make something of those.62
Which brings us to that other point of Place/ Fitterman’s: that “the authorial
framing of text as art removes aesthetic control from the reader.” The note is at least
somewhat undone by the Conjunctions edition of Nets, in which the reader’s cursor
controls the aesthetic of the poem, toggling back and forth between the original text and
the stripped text with the swipe of her cursor— peeling back and laying down the layers
as she pleases. But even in the printed edition, I’m not sure I see how the point applies
to Nets (if it’s meant to). Bervin’s procedure of interrupting expectation seems to work by
empowering the reader to imagine infinite songs unraveled out of Bervin’s
Shakespeare; thus each poem contains porous layers, and besides the ones revealed
by Bervin, the rest that potentially await the reader are fully within the “aesthetic control”
of the reader. Where Bervin succeeds in interrupting the reader/ thinker’s expectation of

62

Metres, Philip. “Philip Metres reviews Nets, by Jen Bervin’” Jacket 2 February 2004. Web. 9
September 30 2015.

34
mastery is where she interpolates the reader himself in the place of the master, or
alongside the master— a reversal of Goldsmith standing in for the state or Place for the
slaveowner, wherein the Conceptualist poet steps behind the mask of the poetic and
political master, and for whom the reader simply serves as a gawking audience. To that
end, I do see how Nets intersects with Notes’ Conceptualist paradigm, shifting the
perceived roles by which poet and reader imagine one another. The difference, then,
would seem to lie in the irony that without the explicit anti-authorial ambition Place/
Fitterman espouse, Bervin seems to come closer to the realization of that ambition.
Thus the parallel between Nets and Rauschenberg’s erasure of de Kooning is the
wrong parallel to draw: Bervin has not so much left “the presence of the absence” as
recovered the presence of other presences— other layers, histories, and preinscriptions
with which to go forward— a recovery in which the reader will serve as her own docent
and master.
I am reminded of Paul Legault’s “translations” of Emily Dickinson in his The Emily
Dickinson Reader— author and work decidedly outside of the Conceptualist scheme—
where poems like this one: 
I have a Bird in spring
Which for myself doth sing—
The spring decoys.
And as the summer nears—
And as the Rose appears,
Robin is gone.
Yet do I not repine
Knowing that Bird of mine
Though flown—
Learneth beyond the sea
Melody new for me
And will return.

35
Fast in safer hand
Held in a truer Land
Are mine—
And though they now depart,
Tell I my doubting heart
They're thine.
In a serener Bright,
In a more golden light
I see
Each little doubt and fear,
Each little discord here
Removed.
Then will I not repine,
Knowing that Bird of mine
Though flown
Shall in distant tree
Bright melody for me
Return.63
are translated as such:
I am in love with my brother’s girlfriend. I am as fond of her as I am of my
younger sister, though I do not want to have sex with my younger sister. My
brother’s girlfriend’s name is Sue, and I want to have sex with her.64
Sue returns frequently in Legault’s translations, as in Dickinson’s 1039: 
 
My heart upon a little plate
Her Palate to delight
A Berry or a Bun, would be
Might it an Apricot!65
 
which Legault translates as: “I love you so much I want you to eat my organs. Forks and
knives are in the top drawer, Sue.”66 None of which is not to misrepresent the book as
63

The quotations of Emily Dickinson I’ll use will follow the versions and paginations of the following
edition: Dickinson, Emily. “5.” The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson. Boston: Little, Brown, 1960. 7.
Print.
64

Similary: Legault’s translations follow: Legault, Paul. The Emily Dickinson Reader: An English-toEnglish Translation of Emily Dickinson's Complete Poems. San Francisco: McSweeney's, 2012. 4. Print.
65

Dickinson, p 472.

66

Legault, p 136.

36
solely concerned with making jokes about Emily Dickinson and her sister-in-law. But it is
indeed the humor in these “translations” that concerns us insofar as it offers more than
a parody of Dickinson by way of a simple high/ low contrast, ribald where Dickinson is
chaste. Not to be humorless, but that these translations make me laugh is really just the
beginning of my reaction and interpretation: why do they invite laughter? Or more
precisely: what expectations of mine do they undermine by absurdity? As noted already:
expectations of the poet and her poetry and that particular tonal pairing of the unveiled
— as in her heart offered on that plate— and the veiled— as in her habit of consigning
herself to a central blank space in the poems to which others, often birds, may return—
are hilariously tipped to towards the former. Thus do Legault’s translations provide the
premise of intimacy with the poet, whose motives for making poetry are collapsed into
her pension for pithily peeking around the birds and flowers to make clear her strong
affiliation with her “I.” And thus too is Dickinson’s own
…The Maple wears a gayer scarf—
The field a scarlet gown
Lest I should be old fashioned
I’ll put a trinket on.67
not really so far in content or tone from Legault’s translation: “If today is opposite day,
I’m happy.”68 But there’s more at stake here than merely playing dress up in the the
Belle of Amherst’s veil— though this in and of itself goes a ways towards picking apart
the hermetic sanctity of her mastery— as our expectations of translation and poetic
interpretation are pressed upon (or tickled) too.
Perhaps it is Legault himself who explains the effect best. In this interview, he
67

Dickinson, p 11.

68

Legault, p 43.

37
describes the undergraduate literature class where the project began:
… everyone in the class was digging through her biography and trying to figure
out what each poem meant in terms of like, Oh, well her cousin had just died,
and she wrote this poem immediately afterward, and this poem is obviously, you
know, about the death of her cousin. So they would translate the poem as: I’m
sad that my dead cousin is dead.
Which I found frustrating initially. I was really kind of annoyed because I was part
of this cult of Emily Dickinson who prized her works as these steel-tight boxes
that were meant to be beheld and not changed… which is insane. I still love that
version of Emily Dickinson, but I also started to fall in love with my classmates’
versions, because I thought it was funny. One poem would be like, “I really
wanna have sex with Susan Gilbert Dickinson, my sister-in-law,” because she
had just written this love letter the day before she wrote the poem. So people
were doing this, and I would take down what they said in the margins, and then I
started to think it was funny. At first I was making fun of them but then I just kept
doing it. The joke became serious.69
The experience of unwillingly sitting in on recitations of this particular brand of reading,
in which every poem is treated as a crossword puzzle whose answers lie in its creator’s
biography, is too familiar to anyone who attended high school. But that Legault
manages to interpolate the room noise of these overdetermined readings— indeed, a
sort of preinscription that is always with us when we read and write poetry— into his
translations is what complicates The Emily Dickinson Reader’s joke. The poems are
less irreverent graffiti than they are, well, something like Goldsmith’s or Place/
Fitterman’s mirror. To that end, Legault’s work at violating the original text to disrupt the
reader’s assumptions surrounding and pertaining to that text and its master is what The
Emily Dickinson Reader has in common with Nets and the paradigm set out in Notes on
Conceptualisms; while we read these translations, we are confronted with our
expectations of the mythology of Dickinson, her unmistakable tone, and the fact that her

69

Aprea, Jonathan. “Death is What’s Happening.” BOMB 11 November 2012. Web. 10 September 2015

38
work— those 1,789 poems in all— is often published in one volume one could forgivably
mistake for the poet herself. But what really springs poet and poem from that “steel-tight
box” here is the reclaiming of these bad readings— Legault’s strategy of holding a
mirror up to the reader not only to ask what is behind the reader (the mechanics of
culture, the history of poetry) but to ask too about the work of interpretation itself. Thus
do these translations deliberately break the promise of their name: rather than providing
faithful reflections of their origins, Legault’s provide a hilariously overcrowded mirror. Or
perhaps the work is more like the rebuilt Argo: The Emily Dickinson Reader dismantles
our assumptions about the poet, the work of her poems, and the reader’s own scholarly
work of interpretation (and self-conscious awareness of that) so that we might become
aware of each part. That it manages to put them back together is its genius. That it
deliberately gets builds it back wrong— opting against elegance, subtlety, or critical
analysis, of which there is already plenty in the world of Dickinson commentary— is its
joke. As Legault puts it in his translator’s note: “Emily Dickinson used to exist. Now
she’s doing it again.” Some repairs and inclusions have become necessary.
What The Emily Dickinson Reader works towards explicitly that Nets does
implicitly is the acknowledgement of the unavoidable space the reader and our ideas
about ourselves (at the very least as readers) take up when we read poetry. In The
Emily Dickinson Reader, this is served out by the invocation of the bad reading; in Nets,
the attention to the history of poetry that is always with us in which the reader is an
archaeologist, sifting through layers. Perhaps this is what presents the starkest contrast
to the work of Place and Goldsmith, wherein the reader is either rebuked— coldly
“remind[ed]” of the fact of oppression, as if we forgot, and as if it was not currently being

39
borne out on some of our backs— or even tortured, our hot emotions (and the texts
colored by them) played upon to saturate the hues of the Conceptualist mirror. In either
of the latter two examples, the reader/ thinker’s role seems rather less clearly imagined.
This helps to explain why Notes on Conceptualisms' symbolic space left to the reader is
an empty offer, its democratic rhetoric belying a programmatic instruction as to how to
read Conceptual poetry. Standing afront Duchamp’s urinal, Place and Goldsmith would
rather you watch them piss in it than get out of the way so you might consider what work
you are up to. Or less rudely: where Nets and The Emily Dickinson Reader involve the
reader in their violated texts so that she might step back and observe herself, Place/
Fitterman’s paradigm imagines her so vaguely that whether she is reading or thinking—
interchangeably constituting a readership or thinkership— is a distinction not so much
explained as dismissed. What matters most to Notes’ procedure is simply that the
reader/ thinker has a front row view of Place claiming the black body as her own,
dominating the reader/ thinker while decrying the dominance of the masters that came
before— the hermeneutic possibilities of the poetry curtailed by the aggressive
showmanship and combative politicking of its creator.
That Nets is employed in Notes’ arguments— if in a manner I think poorly suits
both— makes clear that there is room in even Place/ Fitterman’s Conceptualisms for
poetry whose preoccupations are primarily with literature itself, as opposed to those
hotter texts and the politics of oppression from which they draw heat. The work of The
Emily Dickinson Reader too takes place decidedly within poetry’s more hallowed halls.
Insofar as both come closer to the assassination of poetic mastery— or at least radically
democratized reframing of mastery— Place/ Fitterman seek, I’ve made my case. But I’d

40
like to explore here a work outside the Conceptualist scheme whose textual disruptions
lead to failures of political expectations beyond an explicitly literary scope. It is with
admitted pleasure that I’ll start in on Joan Retallack’s A I D /I/ S A P P E A R A N C E:
A I D /I/ S A P P E A R A N C E
for Stefan Fitterman
for Stefan Fitterman
1. in contrast with the demand of continuity in the customary description
2. of nature the indivisibility of the quantum of action requires an essential
3. element of discontinuity especially apparent through the discussion of the
4. nature of light she said it’s so odd to be dying and laughed still it’s early
5. late the beauty of nature as the moon waxes turns to terror when it wanes
6. or during eclipse or when changing seasons change making certain things
7. disappear and there is no place to stand on and strangely we’re glad
AIDS
for tefn Fttermn
1. n contrt wth the emn of contnuty n the cutomry ecrpton
2. of nture the nvblty of the quntum of cton requre n eentl
3. element of contnuty epeclly pprent through the cuon of the
4. nture of lght he t o o t be yng n lughe tll t erly
5. lte the beuty of nture the moon wxe turn to terror when t wne
6. or urng eclpe or when chngng eon chnge mkng certn thng
7. pper n there no plce to tn on n trngely we’re gl
BHJCERT
fo fn Fmn
1. n on w mn of onnuy n uomy pon
2. of nu nvly of qunum of on qu n nl
3. lmn of onnuy plly ppn oug uon of
4. nu of lg o o yng n lug ll ly
5. l uy of nu moon wx un o o wn wn
6. o ung lp o wn ngng on ng mkng n ng
7. pp n no pl o n on n ngly w gl
FGKQU
o n mn
1. no n w m no on ny no my pon
2. o n nvly o nm o on n nl
3. lm no onny plly pp no on o
4. no l o o yn nl ll ly
5. l y o n moon wx no own wn
6. o n l pow n n no n n mn n n

41
7. pp n no pl o no n n nly w l
LPV
o n mn
1. no n w m no on ny no my on
2. o n ny o nm o on n n
3. m no onny y no on o
4. no o o y n n y
5. y o n moon wx no own wn
6. o now n n no n n mn n n
7. n no o no n n n y w
MOW
n
1. n n n n n y n y n
2. n n y n n n n
3. n n n y y n n
4. n y n n y
5. y n n x n n n
6. n n n n n n n n n
7. n n n n n n y
NX
1. y y
2. y
3. y y
4. y y
5. y
6.
7. y
Y
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Procedural note: The disappearance moves through the letters of the alphabet
(and the source text) in this way: Beginning with letters A I D S, it spreads to
adjoining letters B H J C E R T, to F G K Q U, to L P V, to M O W, to N X, to Y.
Part of the source text is from “The Atomic Theory and the Fundamental

42
Principles Underlying the Description of Nature” in The Philosophical Writings of
Niels Bohr, Volume 1, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature. (Ox Bow
Press, Woodbridge, CT, 1987).70
In terms of constructing a linguistic machine, I can imagine few more affecting
examples. Retallack’s deletions answer to so automatized a procedure that even the
poem’s dedication, by which the poet intercedes personally to offer the work, is not
spared destruction. The formatted citation of the disappearing quotation is similarly
arresting, offering a sense that the text has been officiated by means of a protocol that
answers to a professional standard of reference. In terms of the linguistic machine
Goldsmith speaks of by comparison, I find myself less convinced: for all the
prescriptions of Notes, I am less sure of the motif’s accommodation of Place/
Fitterman’s or Goldsmith’s paradigm, whose procedures are decidedly more flexible and
unpredictable— which is to say, what a machine’s aren’t.
That may be a moot point— if Place/ Fitterman seek to build a machine that fails
your expectations, it may fail too to resemble a machine at all, and that is, after all,
precisely the sort of Lacanian riddle Notes is built on. But even putting aside claims to
the form of the machine, that which Retallack’s serves is a politic far more dynamic
than, say, Place using hers to remind you of chattel slavery. To this end, we should start
by acknowledging that Retallack’s poem constructs its viral procedure by rendering the
ravaging of disease as a textual one— perfectly, if I may say so. But before it selfdestructs— or more precisely, uses its procedure to destroy its found text— the poem
acts on more than its most obvious analogy of loss. By erasing the text of itself— indeed

70

Retallack, Joan. “A I D /I/ S A P P E A R A N C E.” PROCEDURAL ELEGIES/ WESTERN CIV CONT’D.
New York: Roof Books, 2010. 24-25. Print.

43
“in contrast with the demand of continuity in the customary description—” the poem
ventures itself as vulnerable to such a disappearance that, as the title suggests, AIDS is
only one. The poem wields itself against itself, and thus does the poem no sooner claim
its found text than does it eclipse that text by the governing procedure, instantly
rendering the found text as unreadable fragments bearing only their inky materiality in
common with their origins. “There is no place to stand on,” even if the reader fights to
pronounce “nvblty” (from “indivisibility”) and, indeed, “strangely, we’re glad:” even as the
poem evokes the tragic, the impersonal, and the unrelenting, its program of deletions is
engrossing. There are some disappearances, the poem implies, from which not even
those things without bodies— like poems— are immune. Behind her ceaseless
machine, the poet, too, disappears.
So the explicitly political thread I find bound up in A I D /I/ S A P P E A R A N C E,
is simply another of these disappearances— that by which those victims of AIDS were
erased by their state— the political death suffered by AIDS victims before the bodily
one. To ascribe this to the history of only, say, the the failure of the American president
to publicly acknowledge the existence of the disease before it had taken thousands of
lives, or even more generally to those attitudes of homophobia to which that failure is
often attributed, would be irresponsible. AIDS still ravages the developing world in as
unencumbered a manner as it did in the United States then despite the development of
treatments. And on these shores, AIDS has accordingly accommodated the local politic:
for those whose financial and political precarity does not forbid their seeking treatment,
the disease is a manageable condition not at odds with considerable health. For those
whose does, the narrative remains decidedly one of crisis. Insofar as AIDS is a

44
disappearance in the poem, this political one is too encompassed— and the deleting
space offered up by the poem not only one of mourning as part of the ancient
observance of loss— by which “the beauty of nature as the moon waxes turns to terror
when it wanes—” but one of the citizen’s reclaiming, by which the loss can be
understood as a complaint, if a doomed one, in defiance of the political death.
It is in this political aspect that A I D /I/ S A P P E A R A N C E’s positioning of the
reader seems clearest to me. In the face of its various disappearances— textual, bodily,
political, and authorial— the reader serves not as Bervin’s archaeologist, or Legault’s
student, or Goldsmith’s audience. Instead, the reader serves here as a witness— the
last role of refuge available to those who face their destruction or oppression. That the
reader registers her “terror” and pieces through its various implications, is the program
of her reading. Where Place and Goldsmith hold up the Conceptual mirror, expecting
the reader/ thinker to draw their own conclusions (so long as those conclusions adhere
to certain premises) or simply remind the reader/ thinker of the fact of political
oppression— in either case relying heavily on the reader/ thinker to figure out for herself
what politically efficacious action should follow— Retallack makes room for a political
role for her reader literal and not symbolic in its scope. The poem’s destruction makes
us a witness, watching as its line thin themselves out towards total disappearance. And
yet the sense that the work might reinscribe the law of the tragedy it describes is not
nearly so present as in, say, The Body of Michael Brown: no less emotional (or, if you
insist, “hot”) than Brown’s autopsy, the text ventures itself and its own destruction— its
own identity up for grabs— by its deleting procedure. If we are to be disappeared, the
poem is going down with us. If we survive, it will be with a clear notion of our political

45
responsibility as witnesses and perhaps even the role poetry can serve as to fulfilling
that responsibility.

46
Conclusions
This project is as imperfect as it is simply incomplete. I’m not sure more time
would have helped, though it is a bad habit of mine to say yes, always yes to that
question. A more thorough project would have involved some discussion of the
connections between the Conceptual poets and the visual arts movement from which
they draw their name. As implied here, the matter disinterests me insofar as the
connection seems like a stretch on the part of the former; I do not think basic artistic
strategies or procedural moves define a meaningful alliance, which would seem to
emphasize similarities of means to the detriment of considering their ends. Likewise, a
consideration of the Language poets whose path from the avant-garde into the
academy preceded the Conceptual poets’ acceptance of this route might have been
interesting— though again, but for a shared enmity of the lyric and its dominance of the
canon, I’m not sure I see as many compelling parallels as I do a shared means (and
venue) towards different ends. Perhaps my favorite Language text, Lyn Hejinian’s My
Life, intervenes upon the medium of the autobiography to create an account of oneself
far more suggestive and encompassing than the elided narratives I associate with that
medium. And yet I have seen little in Conceptual poetry that equips itself with the
linguistic tools to perform either so nuanced or so specific an intervention. Finally, and
probably most maddeningly, I am sore over the second chapter, which I enjoyed writing,
and which should have gone on for longer if only because I enjoyed it— reason enough,
I say! That there is enough in its readings to bear out what I struggled to find in Notes
on Conceptualisms is possible given a generous reader. That I should have gone further
is undeniable.

47
Nonetheless, this project represents as clear and reasoned an argument as to
my trouble with Conceptual poetry as I’ve ever been pushed to make. Having spent long
hours reading interviews with Vanessa Place and Kenneth Goldsmith, and even longer
ones on Notes on Conceptualisms, I feel sure that the holes in their poetics are indeed
as wide as I imagined, and their ideas about who reads or thinks about their poetry as
unencouraging. If I duck up from the texts here at the end, it’s to say that I doubt very
much their poetry is for anyone outside their particular corner of the academy (which,
okay— another similarity to the Language poets). It is not for me, who is unlikely to
return to any corner of the academy after this. But I at least as encouraged by what I
found in Jen Bervin, as well as other Conceptual poets whose consideration would have
been included had this paper been what it could have been— included in this are Stacy
Doris, Juliana Spahr, and poor Rob Fitterman, who is unfairly yoked to Vanessa Place
for the entirety of this project. But even in just Bervin’s Nets and the parallels I saw
between her work and that of Paul Legault and Joan Retallack, I was made me hopeful
that other Conceptualisms (and Conceptualists) were not only possible, but already
realized— simply less publicized than those more troubling manifestations. I’ll take that
last refuge of the unfinished, then: that this project, if nothing else, is a place from which
I’ll move on to other, better Conceptualisms— ones whose strategies are not employed
to shuck its authors of their responsibilities, but to invite something from and make
space for their reader/ thinker— in good faith.

48
Works Cited
“About Interrupt 3.” Interrupt 3. Brown University. Web. 14 September 2015.
Adorno, Theodor W. "Cultural Criticism and Society." Negative Dialectics. Trans. E. B.
Ashton. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973. 362-363. Print.
Aprea, Jonathan. “Death is What’s Happening.” BOMB 11 November 2012. Web. 10
September 2015.
Becker, Jo, and Scott Shane. “Secret ‘Kill List’ Proves a Test of Obama’s Principles and
Will.” The New York Times 29 May 2012. Web. 29 May 2012.
Bedient, Calvin . “Against Conceptualism.” Boston Review 24 July 2013. Web.
“Best Sellers in American Poetry.” Amazon. 12 November 2015. Web. 12 November
2015.
Bosman, Julie, and Monica Davey. "Protests Flare After Ferguson Police Officer Is Not
Indicted." The New York Times 24 November 2014. Web. 11 August 2015.
Brecht, Bertolt. The Threepenny Opera. Trans. Desmond Vesey. New York: Grove
Press, 1960. 92. Print.
Chen, Ken. “Authenticity Obsession, or Conceptualism as Minstrel Show.” Asian
American Writer’s Workshop. 11 June 2015. Web. 1 November 2015.
Dickinson, Emily. “5.” The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson. Boston: Little, Brown,
1960. 7. Print.
Fitterman, Robert, and Vanessa Place. Notes on Conceptualisms. Brooklyn: Ugly
Duckling Presse, 2009. 1. Web. 11 August 2015.
Goldsmith, Kenneth. “Flarf is Dionysus. Conceptual Writing is Apollo.” Poetry July/
August 2009. Web. 10 July 2015.
Halpern, Jake. “The Cop.” The New Yorker 10 August 2015. Web.
Harris, Andrew, and Edvard Pettersson. “Ferguson Officer Darren Wilson Told Grand
Jury He Feared for His Life.” Bloomberg 25 November 2014. Web. 13 September
2015.
Kaplan, Josef. Kill List. Baltimore: Cars Are Real, 2013. 22. Print.
“Kenneth Goldsmith reads poetry at White House Poetry Night.” Online video
clip.YouTube. Youtube, 12 May 2011 Web. 12 May 2011.

49

Legault, Paul. The Emily Dickinson Reader: An English-to-English Translation of Emily
Dickinson's Complete Poems. San Francisco: McSweeney's, 2012. 4. Print.
Metres, Philip. “Philip Metres reviews Nets, by Jen Bervin’” Jacket 2 February 2004.
Web. 9 September 30 2015.
Moss, Jeremiah. “Goldsmith’s Capital.” Jeremiah’s Vanishing New York. Blogspot.
Blogspot 10 November 2015. Web. 10 November 2015.
Place, Vanessa. “Artist’s Statement.” Drunken Boat. Drunken Boat. Web. 10 November
2015.
Place, Vanessa. “‘Notes on Conceptualisms’: A dialogue between Vanessa Place and
Tania Ørum.”Jacket 2 22 February 2012 — 22 June 2012. Web. 13 August 2015.
Retallack, Joan. “A I D /I/ S A P P E A R A N C E.” PROCEDURAL ELEGIES/
WESTERN CIV CONT’D. New York: Roof Books, 2010. 24-25. Print.
Rilke, Rainer Maria. “To Höldernin.” Uncollected Poems. Trans. Edward Snow. Ed.
Edward Snow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997. 107. Print.
St. Louis Dispatch Daily. “PDF: Autopsy Report for Michael Brown.” 21 October 2014.
Web. 7 September 2015.
Sandhu, Sukhdev. “Kenneth Goldsmith interview: ‘I wanted to take Walter Benjamin off
the pedestal and on to the coffee table.’” The Guardian 21 November 2015. Web.
9 October 2015.
Stevens, Wallace. “Cuisine Bourgeoisie.” The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens.
New York: Vintage Books, 1990. 227. Print.
“Uncreativity as a Creative Practice.” Electronic Poetry Center. University of Buffalo. 10
November 2000. Web. 16 October 2015.
Varadharajan, Asha. "The Unsettling Legacy Of Harold Bloom's ‘Anxiety Of Influence.’"
Modern Language Quarterly 69.4 (2008): 461-480. Academic Search Premier.
Web. 1 December 2015.
Wilkinson, Alec. “Something Borrowed." The New Yorker 5 October 2015. Web. 5
October 2015.

