Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2015

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2015

Philip Roth/Nathan Zuckerman/Philip Roth
Written/Written/Unwritten
Grayson Gibbs
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Gibbs, Grayson, "Philip Roth/Nathan Zuckerman/Philip Roth Written/Written/Unwritten" (2015). Senior Projects Spring 2015. Paper
80.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2015/80

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2015 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Introduction

“…and the likeness to him was wonderful.”
- Book 23, line 106-7. p. 475. The Iliad. Translated by Richmond Lattimore.
“Think of the ventriloquist. He speaks so that his voice appears to proceed from someone at a distance
from himself. But if he weren’t in your line of vision you’d get no pleasure from his art at all. His art
consists of being present and absent; he’s most himself by simultaneously being someone else, neither of
whom he “is” once the curtain is down. You don’t necessarily, as a writer, have to abandon your biography
completely to engage in an act of impersonation. It may be more intriguing when you don’t. You distort it,
caricature it, parody it, you torture and subvert it, you exploit it—all to give the biography that
dimension that will excite your verbal life.”
- Philip Roth, Interviewed by Hermione Lee, The Art of Fiction No. 84, The Paris Review

Few writers have been subject to as much subjective commentary as Philip Roth.
Each party, it seems, has its own take on the writer. For a long time, particularly during the
stronger portions of the feminist movement, Roth was considered misogynist. After the
publication of works like Goodbye Columbus and Five Short Stories, he was judged anti-semitic.
After Portnoy’s Complaint, he was deemed debased. Roth has been pigeonholed, determined,
proclaimed, situated, decided upon. He has been called the perverted uncle of letters, a

1 of 50

provocateur of manners, a traitor to his people. The writer is hated or praised depending on
the enclave interpreting him. The point is that Philip Roth has an interaction with the
public unlike few writers; that is, few readerships have such such a dynamic reaction to their
writers as Philip Roth have and few writers have played with their readership as Philip Roth
has. That is mostly because Philip Roth’s books confuse realities. They muddy the diﬀerences
between life and play, the as-is and as-is-possibile, the happened and the fabricated.
Roth, as an author criticized for decisions in regards to women and religion, has just
as much been concerned with identity. His usage has transformed over his career, from
writing about a writer, Nathan Zuckerman, whose life resembles Roth’s closely, to ultimately
inserting himself into his fiction, with his own name and ostensible life’s facts. Roth has had
a general trajectory from being a writer who it is suspected writes about himself to a writer
who outrightly writes about himself with descriptions that the reader believes must be him.
It seems definitely to be a real account of the writer’s life inside of his pieces of work that he
calls fiction. In The Counterlife, Nathan’s brother Henry, in his eulogy of the writer,
repeatedly brings up the constant accusation of whether or not Nathan’s fiction was actually
fictitious or directly derived from real life. “Is it fiction?” has been the question asked of
Roth arguably since the publication of his second book, Letting Go. Roth has written about
writers in most of his works since his extremely well-received, yet hugely controversial
Goodbye, Columbus and the accompanying five short stories that went with it. I believe that
after Roth published Portnoy’s Complaint, the focus of his writing changed forever.
When he received wide acclaim and attention for Goodbye, Columbus, he was twentysix. It was published in the last year of the 1950s, and won the National Book Award for
1960. With critical praise, it received huge criticism from Jews who considered stories like

2 of 50

“Defender of the Faith” embarrassments that perpetuated unattractive stereotypes. The
same year that the movie version of Goodbye, Columbus came out, 1969, his most famous
book, arguably ever, Portnoy’s Complaint, was published.
After Portnoy’s Complaint, Roth was accorded a fame that few writers of his age are
ever given, no doubt due to his talent and work. Whether his subsequent focus on the
writer’s life was because of this or a subject he would have concerned himself with regardless
is speculative. Still, I think Roth’s concentration on the subject of a writer’s life cannot be
discounted to his early success as a writer.
I don’t rely on a gut instinct to take this approach. In both Goodbye, Columbus and
Portnoy’s Complaint, Roth had a lively exchange with his detractors and defamers. Roth was,
from the get-go, an intellectual about his work, not simply a creator who left his words
amenable to the interpretation of the public. He riposted critical accusations with critical
answers. Roth was intellectual about his articulations, and, while perhaps a reluctant
responder to the critical dialogue, a strident, avid responder nonetheless. This early
intellectualism and responsiveness, I believe, transformed from a public and binary
exchange about his earlier works to a private and tertiary explosion in his later works. That
is, at first the intellectual exchange was outside of his work, while later it became his work.
——————————
Philip Roth was, particularly at the start of his career, criticized by some of the most
vocal cultural activists and interventionists of the 20th century: fellow Jews and feminists.
Roth published began publishing books in the first three decades after the Holocaust (the
anti-semitic heartthrob Goodbye, Columbus and Five Short Stories was published about 14 years
after V-day) as well as at the start and height of the 1960s American feminist movement.
3 of 50

Roth early on defended himself in publications like Commentary, (find others, they are
there). One rabbi famously asked, “What is being done to silence this man?” before
responding, “Medieval Jews would have known what to do with him.” Some in the Jewish
rabbinical crowd went so far as to say that the stereotypes of Jews that Roth perpetuated in
his works were the same kind that caused the Holocaust. In 1962, at a Yeshiva University
forum, Roth vowed to “never write about Jews again.” Roth was at the center of a literary
maelstroms in a tumultuous time. “Roth is a self-hating Jew.” “Roth is depraved.” “Roth
objectifies women.” Sentiments like these were aimed at him en masse. “And still the rabbis
rage,” a writer proclaimed in a 1964 Chicago Review. As Roth himself said, he was called
“dangerous, dishonest, and irresponsible.”1
Roth responded though. He said in a 1963 6,800-word Commentary article “Writing
About Jews,” “Not only do they [certain Jewish readers and critics] seem to me often to have
cramped and untenable notions of right and wrong, but looking at fiction as they do—in
terms of ‘approval’ and ‘disapproval’ of Jews, ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ attitudes toward Jewish
life—they are likely not to see what it is that the story is really about” (Commentary, Roth).
This article had 23 Letters to the Editor published, including three from rabbis. Commentary
then printed an ensuing dialogue through letters between the insulting rabbis which he
referenced in his original article. Rabbi Emanuel Rackman of Congregation Shaaray Tefila in
Far Rockaway, New York, blithely wrote “So we have censured each other and thus
verbalized our sense of outrage.” Roth responded with numerically-organized answers to
each of his combatants: “I should like to clarify certain matters of fact that have been raised
The Rabbi who called him this later, in a Commentary Letter-to-the-Editor, wrote ,“Nowhere in my sermon
did I refer to his writings in Goodbye, Columbus or elsewhere as ‘dangerous, dishonest or irresponsible.; There
must be some internal irritant in Roth's ‘psychological shell’ which . . . accounts for his sensitivity to honest
criticism.”
1

4 of 50

by three correspondents.” For example, to “Dr. Seligson,” his second rebuttal is about the
aforementioned critical description of Roth: “(2) It is true Dr. Seligson did not call my work
‘dangerous, dishonest, or irresponsible,’ but then he is not quoted as having said that. He is
mistakenly attributing to himself adjectives used by me in my opening sentence to describe
both the kind and the extent of the charges made against my first book.” In the first decade
of his career, Roth’s written engagement with his vocal critics was pathological and
unrelenting.
Roth’s responses took the form of articulate articles written for a public readership—
texts which were no less printed than his books. If Roth believed in the precept of a silent
authorial presence, he did not abide to it, but was, in fact, somewhere closer to the
opposite. Whether his publicists, agents, or publishing house recommended that he be so
responsive is unknown. What any reader can see, however, from the existing non-fiction
texts, is Roth’s enthusiastic, meticulous, and spirited defense of his prose, and, more
importantly, his purpose as a fiction writer. His cause celebre. His cause celebre to himself. His
new mission. His heartfelt hit that itched him too much.
In that same Commentary article, Roth attempted to explain his take on fiction, but,
after a paragraph describing the merits of the art, wrote, “I do not care to go at length here
into what a good many readers take for granted are the purposes and possibilities of fiction.”
While he did provide an answer, albeit not “at length,” I believe many of Roth’s future works
themselves death with the “purposes and possibilities” of fiction more than fiction itself. He
used the device itself as an object to be examined, not merely what it did. In this sense,
Roth’s later works seems not just functionalist, a novel as a conveyer, but an examiner of the
object itself.

5 of 50

Roth created a vast arsenal to engage and combat authorial and literary attacks, and I
believe these methods ultimately became his subject and style, a pre-defensive, presupposed
conversation to a preconceived reader. Roth has ever since made his career a refraction of
the writerly life, exploring time-space boundary between fiction and reality, the written and
the unwritten. Roth, perhaps, is a product of his myth as much as his own imagination.
Has Roth inherently allowed the response to his fiction to guide his life, and hence
turned it into reality? When you have a pulpit as big as Roth’s, the fiction becomes in eﬀect
just as valid as the reality. What he writes, people talk about. What he experiences becomes
his aura, his myth, his possibility.
Thus, what commentary about Roth’s perspective of reality, informed through years
as a novelist writing books from a novelist’s perspective? What can be seen from his writing
not so much about the fictitious and the imaginary, but the “written” versus “unwritten”
worlds?
Most importantly, how does the the verbal life, which encompasses both the written
and the spoken, eﬀect Roth’s fiction, the reader, and the medium of the novel?

——————————
In a way, Roth’s writing is interactive because it (I believe) often involves a reader
who supposes it “knows” Roth. A sense of familiarity is grown out of the large “story world”
that Roth has created in the Zuckerman and “Roth” novels. Nathan Zuckerman can be (and
has been) easily viewed as a stand-in for Philip Roth: Roth uses events from his own life as
material for the narrator and character Zuckerman. To some, Roth is Zuckerman,
Zuckerman is Roth. Roth was certainly aware of this when he first wrote about a writer
writing a book called Carnovsky that so closely mirrored his own Portnoy’s Complaint.
6 of 50

Similarly, he was aware that by using a character called “Philip Roth,” readers would likely
compare that writer with the real person, although ironically more cautiously and
suspiciously than with Zuckerman, an idea that I will approach later. However, Roth has
shown a trend towards uniting his public persona, his authorial self, and his fictional
characters: a writer, a writer, and a writer. What ones does influences the others and back
again. This dialectic is part of the excitement and provocation that comes from reading a
Philip Roth novel.
For Philip Roth, readers often attempt to make judgments on his work based on
their “world knowledge” of him. He appears to oﬀer a “factual” story, but the verisimilitude
of the story is very hard to discern. His fiction seems to border so closely his own reality
that many readers question if often what they read by him is fiction at all. Roth overtly plays
with “facts.” Readers conjecture back. Roth has created a fiction that is interesting despite it
being so personal, semi-autobiographical, or autobiographically-derived or inspired. Roth is
insulted by the idea that he “has no imagination.” The success of his fiction may result in
part from the interactivity it oﬀers to readers. Readers with a stable base in reality,
regardless of if that base is actually real, projected, or assumed, can derive many benefits
from such a set-up. By following a character they feel, they can derive diﬀerences between
the real and the fictitious. This seems to have an important position for a both readers of
entertainment and readers trying to get something out of their fiction.
Roth Lines
Roth has had an evolution in his writing that I have crudely attempted to “rank” in
terms of their writerliness to ultimately their “post-modernness.” At first there is a

7 of 50

concentration on stories about writers and the writerly life, then stories about writers who
resemble Roth, to, ultimately, by the time of Operation Shylock, stories about characters with
the name “Philip Roth.” The purpose of a ranked list of Roth’s works is not for scientific
clarity, but merely as a rough means of illustrating the transformation for the later purpose
of an exploration as to what these decisions did to the concentration of Roth’s work. I
believe that Roth quickly transformed into a heavily metafictional writer, and that he uses
not just shifts in narrative voices, but shifts in the whole fictitious framework of a story.
From the writerly to the metafictional and post-modern:
Novel
Letting Go
Zuckerman Bound

Main Character
Graduate-student writer
Rothian novelist

Deception: A Novel
Operation Shylock: A Confession
The Plot Against America

“Philip Roth”
“Philip Roth”
“Philip Roth” (though slightly diﬀerent)

The Counterlife

Rothian novelist

(The Facts: A Novelist’s Autobiography)

8 of 50

The Counterlife
The Counterlife is nearly impossible to summarize. It consists of five sections: “Basel,”
“Judea,” “Aloft,” “Gloucestershire,” and “Christendom.” Tempting as it is to call them neatly
separable alternate realities, they are not. Here, however, I have presented as basically as
possible the summaries of each section, while in the following pages I will discuss the
intricacies.
In “Basel,” Henry Zuckerman, married New Jersey dentist and brother of the prolific
Roth-esque writer and The Counterlife's narrator Nathan Zuckerman, risks the dangers of
elective heart surgery in order to cease taking the medications which—while saving him
from a heart attack prevent him from being able to have sex. To continue his lusty aﬀair
with his young dental assistant, Henry undergoes the surgery, but dies during the operation.
In “Judea,” Henry actually survives the operation from “Basel,” but ends up actually
very unhappy. After tremendous post-operation depression, he ultimately ends up as a
“religionationalistic” radical in Israel. Nathan travels to Israel in an attempt to retrieve him
back to his life in America, but is unsuccessful.
In “Aloft,” Nathan is flying back from Israel to England, where he has moved to live
with his new English wife, Maria. The plane is hijacked by a young man who Nathan met
while in Israel, and he is implicated as an accomplice by undercover agents aboard the plane.
In “Gloucestershire,” the first three sections never happened. In this section, Nathan
—not his brother Henry—has heart disease. Nathan kindles an intense aﬀair sans
intercourse with a married Englishwoman named Maria who lives in the apartment upstairs
with her baby and abusive husband. Nathan and Maria have lengthy conversations, but

9 of 50

cannot form a sexual bond because of his erection-preventing heart medication. Like Henry
in “Basel,” Nathan undergoes surgery, but dies during the operation.
In “Christendom,” Nathan’s life as it was in the previous sections continues; he has
his dream life, which includes becoming a “daddy,” with his young Maria in England, but his
life there is met with nasty anti-semitism from the English people, including his new wife’s
family. This causes a rift in the new couples relationship. “Christendom” is the most
confusing of the sections as it is not clear whether Nathan and Maria ever really married and
she became pregnant, or if—during the aﬀair in which Nathan seduces Maria into leaving
her husband to become his wife—Maria had simply secretly read Nathan’s manuscript of
their could-be life and decided that their aﬀair should not go further.2
Overall, in The Counterlife, there are four eulogies (two publicly, which hide the
actual, and two thought, which reveal it), five letters, a journalistic Q&A dialogue (at first,
seemingly public, but ultimately an internal conversation with Nathan’s ghost), three
manuscripts (two burned, one published), a bevy of interspersing writer’s notes, meticulously
constructed speeches, and myriad mental alterations of other characters’ words. This
inventory is a superficial measuring stick to appraise the value of the verbal in The
Counterlife. However, to begin with, it shows the intensity of media-within-medium that
Roth has embedded into this detailed, confusing “novel.”
There are, however, moments when these conventional written or verbal
embedments, e.g. letters or eulogies, oﬀer somewhat crude identifications of the plots and
characters from which to contrast other accounts in this large “possible worlds” story book.
The most diﬃcult example to elucidate, but also the richest, is in the relationship,
Confused over all the “Marias?” “Nathan called all shiksas Maria—the explanation seemed as ludicrously
simple as that.”
2

10 of 50

throughout The Counterlife, between the Zuckerman brothers and their Marias, particularly
between Nathan and his 27 year-old English Maria.

——————————
Nathan Zuckerman, in The Counterlife, provides an entryway into the inner world of a
writer. Nathan has harvested his brother Henry’s personal tribulations as fodder for fiction
for years. After his brother’s funeral, in “Basel,” Nathan begins to fantasize about the
possible routes that his brother’s life may have taken in regards to his familial and romantic
lives:
While peeing in the upstairs bathroom, he thought, ‘Suppose on that afternoon she’d
secretly come to the house, after they married each other by performing anal love, he
watched her, right in this room, pinning up her hair before getting in with him to take a
shower. Seeing him adoring her—seeing his eyes marvel at this strange European woman
who embodies simultaneously both innocent domesticity and lurid eroticism—she says,
confidently smiling, ‘I really look extremely Aryan with my hair up and my jaw exposed.’
‘What’s wrong with that?’ he asks. ‘Well, there’s a quality in Aryans that isn’t very attractive
—as history has shown.’ ‘Look,’ he tells her, ‘let’s not hold the century against you…’
No, that’s not them, thought Zuckerman, and came down the stairs into the living
room, where Wendy was still nowhere to be seen. But then it needn’t be ‘them’—could be
me, he thought. Us. What if instead of the brother whose obverse existence mine inferred—
and who himself untwinnishly inferred me—I had been the Zuckerman boy in that agony?
What is the real wisdom of that predicament? Could it be simple for anyone? (TC, 42)

This excerpt from “Basel” shows the mind of this fictional fiction writer at work, expanding
what-ifs and entertaining questions that will be explored in subsequent sections. Indeed,
Nathan in “Gloucestershire” becomes the “Zuckerman boy in that agony.” “What is the real
wisdom” of a complex predicament for another human being and “could anything so
complex be simple for anyone” are questions that this novel explores inherently in its form.
The form itself is naturally empathetic. It conjectures diﬀerent characters’ responses to a
somewhat similar situations, the narrator himself included, as well as shows the possible
routes that life can take for an infinite amount of reasons.
11 of 50

The Counterlife makes multiple existences possible—not through the telling of four
equally possible independent stories, nor through science fiction nor magical realism, but by
acknowledging that its stories are written by a fiction writer in a fictional medium. The
Counterlife is eﬀective and elegant because of its strides towards self-acknowledgment as a
novel. As important as its self-conscious fictitiousness, however, is its emphasis on the
power of the verbal. I strongly believe that in Roth’s work, the process of writing is a source
of empowerment, of control, of rationality, of choice, and, ultimately, of freedom. This
concept is illustrated in characters and story, as well as form, but most importantly, how they
work together. “The verbal life” is a way to convert the past, the present, and the future into
what one likes. Through instruments as simple as verb tenses, the past, present, and future
can be formed. It is how fantasies and the inner life are turned into reality. That is why
Roth’s work, in my opinion, is so existential, questioning issues like determinism and free
will.
——————————
Literacy means the ability both to read and to write. To put it crudely, The Counterlife
seems to promote a written-type of literacy more than it does a reading-type of literacy, at
least in the context of the type of work by Roth that I’m focusing on. It’s promoted as much
as it can be given that it is still a novel, not some kind of experimental, interactive writing
exercise with a reader (“wreader?” “wrider?”). For Roth’s The Counterlife, the written seems
more positive and active, while what is read is more negative and passive. It shows the
ability of the writer to create. The writer has the power; the writer transforms his or her
existence.

12 of 50

Maria, for instance, is constantly referring to herself as “passive.” The only idea that
Maria finds accurate about herself in the fictional piece she that she finds written by Nathan
is that she is “deeply passive.” After Nathan dies from his elective heart operation in
“Gloucestershire,” Maria reads his manuscript “Christendom,” and comes to believe that he
never understood her because of her passivity: “I think he never understood that side of me.
I like to passively enjoy my life. I never wanted to be anything or to do anything” (TC, 250).
Nathan’s writing identifies the past’s, present’s, and future’s possible tumult, while
Maria prefers to enjoy life as it unfolds and in the moment. Maria dislikes Nathan’s take on
the past: “You and I argue, and twentieth-century history comes looming up, and at its most
infernal.” She dislikes him for his take on the present: “…a life without horrible diﬃculties…
is inimical to the writer you are. You actually like to take things hard. You can’t weave your
stories otherwise” (TC, 316). Most importantly, and of course as a result of Nathan’s take on
the past and present, Maria hates the future he has invented, despite its fictitiousness, that
is the story within Tbe Counterlife. In her letter to Nathan, in response to her having read the
future life that he has created, she writes, “You want to play reality-shift? Get yourself
another girl. I’m leaving. When I see you now in the lift or down in the foyer collecting your
mail, I will pretend, though it may only be the two of us who are there, that we have never
been anything other than neighbors…” (TC, 318).
Importantly, Nathan’s and Maria’s approaches to how they live their lives are
evidenced in their writing styles: “You didn’t seem to realize that writing for me isn’t
everything about my existence wrestling to be born but just some stories about the mists
and the Gloucestershire meadows” (TC, 315). She goes on, “And I didn’t realize that even a

13 of 50

woman as passive as I has to know when to run for her life.” For Maria, writing “some
stories about the mists and the Gloucestershire meadows” is opposite to what Nathan
writes. “Tranquility,” she says, “is disquieting to you, Nathan, in writing particularly—it’s bad
art to you, far too comfortable for the reader and certainly for yourself ” (TC, 316).
Ultimately, what becomes the answer to Maria’s passivity, more specifically her
discontent, is her act of writing. It is not the imitative 19th century-type of writing she has
written before, but a new kind of writing. The writing’s placement is unclear—it could range
from a journal to a novel—but the eﬀect is not. “My life began again,” she says, “when I
absolutely gave up on him, and started writing again, and met you—all sorts of things
happened that were really wonderful” (TC, 253). This writing to the ghost of Nathan who,
after provocative conversations about transformation and other potential lives, provided her
the right audience to give her words. For a writer like Roth so concerned with the reader,
Maria’s discovery of the ghost of Nathan as a recurrent addressee is essential to eﬀective
writing. “Keep talking,” he tells her. “I will. I will,” she says, continuing, “I know now what a
ghost is. It is the person you talk to. That’s a ghost. Someone who’s still so alive that you talk
to them and talk to them and never stop. A ghost is the ghost of a ghost. It’s my turn now to
invent you” (TC, 255). Maria’s power to put existence into words is her power to invent and
to take control. The verbalizer has power. Even Maria’s two year-old daughter exemplifies
this attitude about writing. The ghost of Nathan asks Maria how her little girl is doing.
Maria replies, “Very well. She can speak so well now. ‘I want a piece of paper.’ ‘I want a
pencil.’ ‘I’m going outside’” (TC, 255). The daughter’s first requests are for tools to write, to
verbalize.

14 of 50

Carol, Henry’s wife, provides another example of the power of verbalization. In her
eulogy of her husband, she describes a man who underwent heart surgery that wasn’t
imperative for the sake of his marriage, “who died to recover the fullness and richness of
married love” (TC, 25). In the audience, Nathan wonders if Carol knew of Henry’s aﬀairs,
including his aﬀair with his assistant, Wendy, who was the real reason he underwent the
surgery. He wonders if she remained silent simply for the sake of their family. He thinks to
himself of Carol, “Either what she’d told everyone from the altar was what she truly
believed, either she was a good-hearted, courageous, blind, loyal mate whom Henry had
fiendishly deceived to the last, or she was a more interesting woman than he’d ever thought,
a subtle and persuasive writer of domestic fiction, who had cunningly reimagined a decent,
ordinary, adulterous humanist as a heroic martyr to the connubial bed” (TC, 47). Put simply,
Nathan imagines Carol imagining how to cover up both Henry’s aﬀairs and her knowledge
of them. There is either Carol the tenderhearted but duped or Carol the knowing but
deliberate, and because of these two Carols, there are potentially two Henrys: Henry the
real dope or Henry the manipulative. There is Carol who loved her husband or Carol who
says may he rot for his “nightly blow job” from his assistant Wendy.
In a rather passive way like Maria, Carol says, “…I’m not someone who makes
miracles happen; I’m someone who tends to make do with what’s at hand—even, I’m afraid,
with her own imperfections.” “But Henry,” she continues, “would no more accept
imperfection in himself than in his work.” While Carol proclaims to be loving and admiring,
Nathan cannot help but construct a counter-conversation with a knowing Carol. In Nathan’s
fantasies of this knowing version of Carol as a “writer of domestic fiction,” Nathan sees,
even if imaginarily, the power of a verbal mastery. Carol, at the podium delivering the eulogy,
15 of 50

was the ultimate teller of her life’s destiny. She told the story, word by word, to the people in
her life. She delivered a carefully curated speech, wrote the historical end of her husband. It
had a skeptic like most stories do, as evidenced on page 37 when Cousin Essie talks to
Nathan (initials added):
N:
E:
N:
E:
N:
E:

“It’s not so shmucky when you’re impotent at thirty-nine,” said
Zuckerman, “and have reason to think it might never end.”
“Being up at the cemetery isn’t going to end either.”
“He expected to live, Essie. Otherwise he wouldn’t have done it.”
“And all for the little wife.”
“That’s the story.”
“I like better the ones you write”.

However, Carol’s eulogy (one of four in The Counterlife) told a very elucidated story, down to
the morals and dramatics. Unlike the undelivered eulogies composed by Nathan and Henry
about each other’s deaths, this eulogy is, at least to Nathan and hence the reader, an allaround fiction. Whether Carol was complicit in its existence, even after Henry’s death
maintaining the facade, or if Henry was the sole author of it, and it was naively retold by
Carol, the words served a huge purpose.
Carol’s extensive fabrication would be a triumph because it kept her family together
and because she “never wanted to see her husband” “hysterical” and “begging” like he was
when she found out about his first aﬀair. If Carol was deceived by Henry, than she was
deceived, and she lost her husband because for reasons other than the ones she believed. If
she knew about the aﬀairs and maintained a marriage and a family despite Henry’s actions,
than she had, at the very least, determined a part of her future. Furthermore, if Carol was
complicit, as Nathan imagined her to be, it would only further support the empowerment

16 of 50

and power of words: during his eulogy she was the writer of the story of the end of Henry’s
life.
If Henry had succeeded on the other hand, duping Carol, he would maintain his
potency that was for him the only feeling of freedom in his life. In the case of Carol and
Henry, the course of a family, of a man, or of the woman weaving a story around that man,
all depend on verbal fabrications. In either case in this example—if Henry succeeded or if
Carol succeeded—it would be so because they successfully contrived stories through careful
word picking.
Nathan, imagining Henry’s previous aﬀair, even recalled his brother’s feeling of
“victory” in moving to Basel with Maria if he could “pull it oﬀ.” While deciding about his
choice to abscond to Basel with Maria, he reads the Fodor’s Switzerland; it’s a country where
the old is “merging imperceptibly with the new” (TC, 39). The text of the travel book
Switzerland is the source Henry looks to for articulation while “trying to make up his mind”
as to what life he will choose: Carol or Maria, New Jersey or Switzerland, old life or new life.
This portion of The Counterlife situation brings to attention an excerpt from Roth’s
Paris Review interview published in 19843 (two years before the publication of The
Counterlife):
You don’t necessarily, as a writer, have to abandon your biography completely to
engage in an act of impersonation. It may be more intriguing when you don’t. You distort it,
caricature it, parody it, you torture and subvert it, you exploit it—all to give the biography
that dimension that will excite your verbal life. Millions of people do this all the time, of
course, and not with the justification of making literature. They mean it. It’s amazing what
lies people can sustain behind the mask of their real faces. Think of the art of the adulterer:
under tremendous pressure and against enormous odds, ordinary husbands and wives, who
would freeze with self-consciousness up on a stage, yet in the theater of the home, alone

3 The

Paris Review. 1984

17 of 50

before the audience of the betrayed spouse, they act out roles of innocence and fidelity with
flawless dramatic skill.

In this excerpt, Roth certainly fuses the “verbal life” with a somehow distorted life that can
lead to otherwise unavailable possibilities—exciting possibilities. Even in this interview
piece, for Roth, distortion of reality through words—fiction, arguably—is a means to
newness.
The relationship between Henry and Nathan is, of course, filled with a writer versus
non-writer power play, almost as if it’s a sort of zero-sum game. When Nathan dies, Henry
ultimately spurns the chance to eulogize him, at least publicly during his funeral. However,
in his head, like the speech that his other incarnation in “Judea” delivers that “was one of
those speeches that people spend hours preparing and delivering while lying in bed unable
to sleep,” Henry manifests a verbal tirade against his brother, belittling him and forming
him into the place that he could not while he was alive. This emancipation from a life under
the control of a writer’s formations, and the sudden empowerment as result of that
emancipation, seems similar to the power that Maria feels when she says that her life started
when Nathan died and she “absolutely gave up on” him, which is also in an apparently
unspoken yet heavily verbal conversation, down to the journalistic, question-and-answer
dialogue.
Henry transforms from a man who has suﬀered an “inchoate, debilitating depression”
into a follower of a verbose, “word-whipping” radical. Even Zuckerman, the famous, lauded
writer, cannot compete with Henry’s prolix new hero, Rabbi Mordecai Lippman. “If I had
nothing to say to Henry right oﬀ,” Zuckerman says, “it was because, following Lippman’s
seminar, language didn’t really seem my domain any longer.” Although he “wasn’t exactly a
18 of 50

stranger to disputation,” he had never in his life “felt so enclosed by a world so contentious,
where the argument is enormous and constant and everything turns out to be pro or con,
positions taken, positions argued, and everything italicized by indignation and rage.” Nathan
is aghast at the rhetorical power of Lippman and the lopsided eﬀect it has. Rather than
respond (“From time to time I’d thought, ‘Fuck it, Zuckerman, why don’t you say what you
think—all these bastards are saying what they think.’), his “way of handling Lippman had
been by being practically mute.” He says, after the dinner during which the onslaught had
occurred, “the simple truth is I was outclassed.”
Of course, Henry latches onto a verbally potent figure in “Judea,” but when they’re
together he himself never outdoes his brother in the latter’s ability to characterize and
transform those around him into a fiction of his own making. After all, Zuckerman wasn’t in
Judea “just as his brother” since, “observed solely from the novelist’s point of view…this was
far and away Henry’s most provocative incarnation” and the most eminently exploitable.”
Certainly around Zuckerman, Henry, “even assertive, even packing that pistol, even with the
best of Lippman bled into his veins,…seemed to me far more trapped than he did in New
Jersey, someone utterly swamped and overcome.” When Nathan intervenes to expose the
rationale for why Henry is with Lippman—that the Rabbi actually resembles Nathan’s and
Henry’s own father who was an “aggressive bully,” “hambone actor,” and “compulsive
talker”—-Henry retorts, “Oh, no, please, no—save the psychoanalysis for the great
American public.” “Wearily he said, ‘Spare me,’” Nathan recounts.
The following important rejoinder from Henry speaks to—besides issues such as
sibling rivalry (of which Henry has always lost)—what he perceives as his injured selfhood

19 of 50

under his brother’s authorial rule. However, in reading this passage, I would urge that the
word “psychology” and Henry’s use of that concept be intentionally conflated with the
writer’s objective to characterize and articulate:
“Look—” he said, and jumped up suddenly as though to go for my throat, “—you’re a
very intelligent man, Nathan, you’re very subtle, but you have one large defect—the only
world that exists for you is the world of psychology. That’s your revolver. Aim and fire—and
you’ve been firing it at me all my life. Henry is doing this because he wants to please Momma
and Poppa, Henry is doing this because he wants to please Carol—or displease Carol, or
displease Momma, or displease Poppa. On and on and on it goes. It’s never Henry as an
autonomous being, it’s always Henry on the brink of being a cliché—my brother the
stereotype. And maybe that was once even so, maybe I was a man who kept dropping into
the stereotype, maybe that accounts for a lot of the unhappiness that I felt back home.
Probably you think that the ways I choose to ‘rebel’ are only stereotypical. But unfortunately
for you I’m not someone who’s only his simple, silly motives. All my life you’ve been right on
top, like a guy guarding me in a basketball game. Won’t let me take one lousy shot.
Everything I throw up you block. There’s always the explanation that winds up belittling me.
Crawling all over me with your fucking thoughts. Everything I do is predictable, everything I
do lacks depth, certainly compared to what you do. ‘You’re only taking that shot, Henry,
because you want to score.” Ingenious! But let me tell you something—you can’t explain
away what I’ve done by motives any more than I can explain away what you’ve done. Beyond
all your profundities, beyond the Freudian lock you put on every single person’s life, there is
another world, a larger world, a world of ideology, of politics, of history—a world of things
larger than the kitchen table!

In the tirade over Nathan’s “psychoanalyzing” of his brother, Henry rebels against many
literary and quasi-literary necessities or burdens like “cliche,” “stereotype,” “motives,”
“explanation,” “fucking thoughts,” “predictable,” and “depth.” Even in conversation and in
life, in Henry’s opinion, Nathan always attempts to transform him into a character, which
again Nathan even admits to himself. As Nathan said in “Basel,” “This profession even fucks
up grief,” but it could just as easily be said that it fucks up family and relationships. The
beauty of The Counterlife is that the Henry of “Judea” is a character, at least from the
perspective of another version of Henry in other sections of the book.
In Nathan’s letter to Henry aboard the El Al flight back to London in “Aloft,” Nathan
mentions all the dichotomies he heard spouted while he was a guest of Modercai Lippman’s
20 of 50

in Judea. He writes, “Normal/abnormal, strong/weak, we-ness/me-ness, not-so-nice/niceness
—there’s one dichotomy missing about which you said little, or nothing: Hebrew/English.”
Nathan admits this might be a writer’s fixation, but he “frankly can’t imagine how it
wouldn’t occur to anyone, since it’s finally Hebrew more than heroism with which you have
surrounded yourself, just as if you went to live forever in Paris it would be French with
which you constructed your experience and thought.” Nathan emphasizes so simply the
importance of how one constructs their “experience and thought.” For Nathan, language is
one of the most crucial aspects of Henry’s transformation. To him, a severance from English
is a tool Henry will only feel is gone when he begins “feeling the loss of the language and the
society that you look…to be so blindly giving up.”
Nathan believes Henry’s upbringing, along with a very communicative father, could
never be associated with a place like Israel. He recalls what he should have said to Rabbi
Mordecai Lippman at dinner: “Maybe the Jews begin with Judea, but Henry doesn’t and he
never will.” He continues his what-he-should-have-said: “He begins with WJZ and WOR,
with double features at the Roosevelt on Saturday afternoons and Sunday doubleheaders at
Ruppert Stadium watching the Newark Bears.” While Jews are known for their allegiance to
the Book, this upbringing in Newark, with the radio programs and the theater (and, of
course, baseball) is not shallow on words and stories itself. 1950s radio dialogues and preCGI films were indeed verbal aﬀairs.
In “Gloucestershire,” the entire aﬀair between Nathan and Maria is verbal. Nathan is
an impotent seducer. Like Henry’s and Wendy’s aﬀair in “Basel,” his aﬀair with Maria
unfolds slowly in sensual, dialogical detail. Nathan says,

21 of 50

I expose myself to her voice as though it were her body, draining from it my every drop of
sensual satisfaction. There’s to be no exquisite pleasure here that cannot be derived from
words. My carnality is now really a fiction and, revenge of revenge, language and only
language must provide the means for the release of everything. Maria’s voice, her talking
tongue, is the sole erotic implement. The one-sidedness of our aﬀair is excruciating.

The power of language to create even the intensest love is shown in this section, despite
Nathan’s ultimate belief that, “Without a sexual bond these things don’t last.” Maria has her
doubts, too: “This endless talk that never reaches a climax has caused two supremely
rational people to entertain the most irrational fantasy until finally it’s come to seem
absurdly tangible.” “This disease,” she continues, “has distorted everything!” Yet, remarkably,
it is later this intense bond made through talk that has led Maria to her freest state of being;
it cultivated in her the ability to talk and write to the ghost of Nathan. Moreover, Maria says
quite explicitly in this passage how remarkably powerful verbalization is: “endless talk” made
an “irrational fantasy” “absurdly tangible.” Nathan responds to Maria’s call for
levelheadedness by telling her that after the surgery they can “conduct a very thorough
investigation” of their feelings to see “if it has been nothing more than some overheated
verbal infatuation…” Of course, the purest form of eros—sexless love formed out of words
—spurs Maria to finally accept Nathan’s marriage proposal before that investigation is
necessary.
Nathan may have only “fallen in love with is that voice deliciously phrasing its
English sentences.” He may be the “man who died for the soothing sound of a finely
calibrated relative clause.” “Caught up entirely in what has come to feel like a purely mythic
endeavor, a defiant, dreamlike quest for the self-emancipating act, possessed by an
intractable idea of how my existence is to be fulfilled, I now must move beyond the words to
the concrete violence of surgery.”
22 of 50

——————————
If all of these examples of characters in The Counterlife are meek contributors to the
thesis that the written word and the mentally sculpted verbal creation are emancipators
with the ability to change reality despite being birthed as unreal, the structure of The
Counterlife is a colossal substantiation.
In the world of “Gloucestershire,” the previous sections of The Counterlife are actually
fictional manuscripts written by Nathan. Henry is alive and has never left New Jersey.
Instead, it is Nathan with the heart issue, not Henry. At Nathan’s funeral, Henry says to
himself in shock, “All the while Nathan had been ill, his diversion, his distraction, his
entertainment, his amusement, his art, had been the violent disfiguring of me” (TC, 226).
“Writing my eulogy!” he thinks disgustedly.
In the beginning of “Gloucestershire,” there is a whiﬀ of a possibility that Henry’s
heart problems happened. Nathan says, “I say, like Henry, ‘This is the most diﬃcult thing
that I’ve ever had to face,’ and she answers, like the hardhearted cardiologist, ‘You haven’t
had a diﬃcult life then, have you?’ ‘All I mean,’ I reply, ‘is that this is a damn shame” (TC,
183). Perhaps Nathan and his brother share a genetic disposition towards heart problems,
and they both required pills. Perhaps the existence of this reference is this: Nathan, in
“Gloucestershire,” is narrating the events of his relationship with Maria (which is the only
section in The Counterlife that is not a manuscript). After having earlier wrote a fictional story
(“Basel”) in which he transplanted upon a fictional Henry his own heart problems, he now
refers to this portion of dialogue in this telling of his own life, showing the “real life” origin

23 of 50

of this cruel rejoinder. This whiﬀ, though, disappears like a smear of rubbing alcohol on a
table. Nathan does not continue to refer to other sections of The Counterlife.

The fact that “Gloucestershire” is not referred to as another manuscript in The
Counterlife is strong evidence for its being the “true” version. The fact and the intricate skill
of The Counterlife is that no section is a give-away for the “real” version. After reading
“Gloucestershire,” which references and transforms all other sections of The Counterlife into
just a novelist’s manuscripts, “Christendom” might possibly still be considered a separate
fiction, independent of the version referred to in “Gloucestershire.”4 That is,
“Gloucestershire” could ultimately be just another fiction, and “Christendom” the reality.
Every potential foothold as to determine which is the “real” and which is the
“fictitious” is pulled away. In Maria’s question-and-answer session that reads like a
conversation with a journalist or tabloid reporter, the person asking the questions turns out
not to be a person at all; rather, the conversation is an internal talk with Nathan that she
imagines. She critiques the veracity of the section to follow, “Christendom,” telling the
questioner that the characterizations were exaggerated to the point of near falseness.
Speaking to a version of Nathan in her head instead of a real person takes away from the
realness of his death, and makes the conversation a playing out of words and possibilities
rather than a concrete action.

For example, in “Gloucestershire,” when Henry is searching his dead brother’s apartment, he finds the “last
chapter called ‘Christendom,’” which appeared to be Nathan’s “dream of escape…a pure magical dream of flight
—from the father, the fatherland, the disease, flight from the pathetically uninhabited world of his inescapable
character. Here Nathan was dreaming about only himself—another self…”
4

24 of 50

The fact is that “Christendom” is just as much a “reality” as any other section in The
Counterlife, a fact made possible by its autonomy as a work of fiction placed side-by-side
with other works of fiction, as well as many incongruences. Firstly, if Nathan invented the
bizarreness of “Basel” and “Judea,” he could make up the bizarreness of “Gloucestershire”—
including his own death—and “Christendom.” Secondly, Nathan never died in any of the
“manuscripts,” only in “Gloucestershire.” In fact, in Maria’s letter to Nathan in
“Christendom,” she alludes to that. She states—then asks: “You weren’t beyond killing your
brother, you weren’t beyond killing yourself, or grandiosely amusing yourself on the plane up
from Israel by staging a lunatic hijack attempt—what if you decide everything will be more
interesting if my daughter steps oﬀ the towpath into the river?” (TC, 313). This makes
Nathan’s death sound like a fiction, that he is really still alive. The letter at the end of
“Christendom” could be a letter to: the ghost of Nathan, the Nathan who still lives
downstairs, the Nathan coming home to the English house hoping Maria will still be there.
In Maria’s letter, she writes in reference to the practice of circumcision which they
would later argue about either in fiction or in life or both, “What I’m saying is that all the
way back on page 73 I saw where you were preparing to take us, and should have got myself
up and out before your plane even landed, let along rushing to the airport to catch you skyhigh still on the Holy Land”5 (TC, 314). Maria could be referring to what her character should
have done or what she should have done in real life. However, since Henry stole the
manuscripts of “Basel” and “Judea” from Nathan’s apartment, how could she know this
reference? In a passage from the world where Nathan has died, and she is even confused
then about her own character: “After reading ‘Christendom’…I began to wonder which was
5

1973 was incidentally the year the “Arabs attacked on…Yom Kippur.”

25 of 50

real, the woman in the book or the one I was pretending to be upstairs. Neither of them was
particularly ‘me.’” In the final letter to Nathan, he appears to be be alive, perhaps still the
neighbor downstairs: “When I see you now in the lift or down in the foyer collecting your
mail, I will pretend…that we have never been anything other than neighbors…” (TC, 318).
Maria could be ending her aﬀair with Nathan before the fiction of the manuscript
“Christendom” becomes her reality; or, Christendom” is “real”, and “Gloucestershire” is
“false.” If Nathan’s death in “Gloucestershire” was fiction, than so was the conversation
Maria has with his “ghost” about it; like that dialogue, the two letters at the end of
“Christendom” could just as easily be fiction, while the main story of “Christendom” could
be true.
Lastly, the end of the “story” section of “Christendom” and Nathan’s letter to Maria
provide another contradiction. When Nathan imagines Maria not being there when he
returns, he has a sudden pang of fear: “Imagine Maria gone, my life without all that, imagine
no outer life of any meaning, myself completely otherless and reabsorbed within—all the
voices once again only mine ventriloquizing, all the conflicts germinated by the tedious old
clashing of contradictions within.” It’s quite sad, but then he says snidely:
But forgo the lament (which everyone who’s ever been locked out of anything knows
by heart)—what exactly is in that letter? Being Maria’s, it could be interesting. This is
a woman who could teach me things. How have I lost her—if I’ve lost her—this
contact, this connection to a full and actual outer existence, to a potent, peaceful,
happy life? Imagine that. (TC, 311).

The novelist from the beginning, imagining life other than reality—fiction—comes to life.
His interest is piqued. He says, “Imagine that.” He perhaps imagines what she might say in a
series of paragraph broken lines:

26 of 50

I’m leaving.
I’ve left.
I’m leaving you.
I’m leaving the book.
That’s it. Of course. The book! She conceives of herself as my fabrication, brands
herself a fantasy and cleverly absconds, leaving not just me but a promising novel of
cultural warfare barely written but for the happy beginning (TC, 312).

And with these lines, formed possibly in his imagination, Maria’s letter begins:
Dear Nathan,
I’m leaving. I’ve left. I’m leaving you and I’m leaving the book and I’m taking Phoebe
away before anything dreadful happens to her (TC, 312).

Thus, looked at in this way, the letters, which seem so much more likely to be the truth,
could be the “imaginary” and the main “story” of “Christendom” the “reality.”
——————————
Is “Gloucestershire” Nathan’s “Basel?” And is “Christendom” Nathan’s “Judea?” The
first sections exploring temptations that lead to an end, the second sections exploring
temptations that lead to a radically new life? That is a promising premise, if not for the
artful snags that can give no assurance. The intra-medium references prohibit assurance.
At the core of The Counterlife are basically two sets each composed of two stories6
each equally believable, each implanted with seeds of doubt as to their veracity. That is a
triumph, for writer Philip Roth in itself. In my opinion, he maintains a more thoughtprovoking narrative in this fractured, self-referential, schizophrenic work than in a
conventional storytelling novel. He does so by pedaling back, running forward, and
zigzagging several potentialities (potentialities that may have become realities or may still).
discordant and similar, opposite and mirroring. His dichotomous braid has the reader
I say “two sets of two stories” and “not four stories” because I believe that “Basel”/“Judea” and
“Gloucesershire”/“Christendom” are more units than individualities. While the death of Henry and Nathan in
“Basel” and “Gloucestershire,” respectively, provide more examination for people like the women in their lives
6

27 of 50

unwittingly unraveling knots while forgetting that it’s all a fiction. More than the yin and
yang puzzle is the The Counterlife’s intentional utilization of this intra-fictional competition
that lets it climb on itself towards a higher finale and realization.
One question posed by Maria in The Counterlife is certainly pertinent: “How does one
know what is real or false with a writer like that? These people aren’t fantasists, they’re
imaginers—it’s the diﬀerence between a flasher and a stripper. Making you believe what he
wanted you to believe was his very reason for being. Maybe his only reason” (TC, 246).
However, unlike the writer Nathan in The Counterlife, Roth’s reason for writing seems not to
make the reader believe any one reality, but to see possible “realnesses” in each, to
understand that writability and an active literacy are weapons and tools in the human life,
past, present, and future.
Could Nathan and Maria not have predicted their problems in real life enough to
avoid them? Is identification of a problem, when two people love each other and want to be
together, not enough to target that problem for destruction as a destructive device? Is
Roth’s ending to The Counterlife superficial or the essence of maintaining a civilized life and
lasting relationship? Nathan tells Henry while in Israel, “Look, I’m all for authenticity, but it
can’t begin to hold a candle to the human gift for playacting. That may be the only authentic
thing that we ever do.” At the end of The Counterlife, Nathan writers in his letter to Maria:

If there even is a natural being, an irreducible self, it is rather small, I think, and may even be
the root of all impersonation—the natural being may be the skill itself, the innate capacity to
impersonate. I’m talking about recognizing that one is acutely a performer, rather than
swallowing whole the guise of naturalness and pretending that it isn’t a performance but you
… There is no you, Maria, any more than there’s a me (TC, 321).

28 of 50

Roth’s choice to write Zuckerman-as-writer I believe impels the reader to think of
Roth-as-writer, as anyone as a writer. Roth does not try to suspend disbelief in The
Counterlife, at least not indirectly: he maintains a story of a writer viewing the events in his
life as potentially harvestable for fiction, but he simultaneously takes the experience of real
events and their transformation into fiction, such that the reader thinks about how the
primary text may have been transformed itself. Roth lays naked fiction. There is nothing to
hide here, but everything to use. Its articulation of multiple worlds and fictions is an
something to be exploited and focused on, not to be steered around. For Roth, having his
cake and eating it, too, isn’t a luxury, but a diﬃcult process necessary to fully realizing—or
fabricating—the possibilities of the form.
—————————In terms of its eﬀect, The Counterlife is really interactive. Depending on the mood or
the person, the novel could be read diﬀerently. In the mood to believe in the power of
determining one’s future, the form can be read as enabling. In a cynical mood, read as
claustrophobic. In the mood for love, read as refreshing. In the mood for reality, read as
painfully real. The ambiguity of the novel allows this.
More importantly, in The Counterlife Roth really shows not only through stories, but
how, through various types of verbalization—like “manuscripts,” mental speeches, internal
dialogues, letters, eulogies—real events can grow out of fiction and how fiction can aﬀect
real events. In The Counterlife, he explores who people who cover-up their realities with
fictions or imagine diﬀerent lives, and ultimately how these fictions become their reality or
aﬀect it. Zuckerman thinks to himself, while in amazement of his brother’s new life in an

29 of 50

Israeli frontier settlement, “…the kind of stories that people turn life into, the kind of lives that
people turn stories into” (italics not added). He shows how words alone can cause love, break up
families, emancipate those who feel trapped, or act as hate incarnated. This book is all about
the eﬀects of the verbal; so many of the relationships in the book depend on it.
The Counterlife is like “The Garden of Forking Paths,” by Jorge Luis Borges, who
writes in that 1941 short story, “In all fictions, each time a man meets diverse alternatives, he
chooses one and eliminates the others; in the work of the impossible-to-disentangle Ts’ui
Pen, the character choose— simultaneously—all of them. He creates, thereby, ‘several
futures,’ several times, which themselves proliferate and fork” (Borges 1998: 125). You could
say that the example of this writer in this Borges story has his cake and eat it too, and
perhaps he does. I think this decision initiates a realization in the reader that a piece of
fiction is never certain, never full-proof, unless it is a rigid, righteous old fable, and even
then, it is not necessarily binding. Roth in the sense of The Counterlife is a provocateur, but
not in the sexual sense traditionally ascribed to him. He breaks the boundary of traditional
fiction and leaves no virtually no form of his niche of the written craft untouched.

30 of 50

Operation Shylock
In Operation Shylock, Roth gives in fully to the writerly awareness that his text is
indeed a text, that he is indeed a force, a public figure; abstractly, he is an idea exclusive of
the fictions he writes. This is a form of self-consciousness that in Operation Shylock, like in
The Counterlife, allows Roth to explore more of the possibilities of fiction. And he does all
this despite writing about a character and world so close, at least biographically, to his own,
while at the same time, writing a plot ridiculously outlandish. Roth bashes hewn
conventional fiction, and overwhelmingly oﬀers Operation Shylock over to a self-awareness of
himself and the medium of the novel.
Like the many verbalizations in The Counterlife, Operation Shylock is full of verbal
constructions: a continuous literary interview with writer-friend Aharon Appelfeld, journal
entries of Leon Klinghoﬀer7, political speeches about the best course for the State of Israel,
“The Ten Tenets of Anti-Semites Anonymous”, and an “A-S.A. Workout Tape” titled “‘Did
the Six Million Really Die?’” that fills seven pages with transcriptive text.
As a transition point from The Counterlife, the writer Philip Roth oﬀers a wise piece of
information in Operation Shylock to the man impersonating him, who he derisively labels
Pipik:
Five-year-old children may take the stories for real, but by the time you’re pushing sixty,
deciphering the pathology of story making comes to be just another middle-age specialty. By
the time you’re pushing sixty, the representations of ‘it’ are ‘it.’ They’re everything. Follow
me? (OS, 200)

The retired Jewish businessman confined to a wheelchair who was killed when he was thrown oﬀ a cruise ship
by Palestinian Liberation Organization terrorists in 1985.
7

31 of 50

Like in The Counterlife, where fictions are placed beside fictions, in this explanation “Roth”
seems to say that the ability of words to ever fully represent a reality is weak at best. That is
not to say that words are not strong themselves, but rather that their connection to the
object, idea, or person they represent is not correct. In Operation Shylock, words have
tremendous power despite who is saying them, and words, even long detached from their
origin, still continue to have deadly weight.
——————————
For Operation Shylock, Roth was a comprehensive intruder into the ostensibly
fictitious piece. It is perhaps his most post-modern book. He pulls out all the stops. He
interjects himself wholly and successfully, referencing everything that the media has said
about him, revealing so many details about his private life that seem likely true. He oﬀers to
the page his biographical history, his life with his then-wife Claire Bloom, his friendship
with the novelist Aharon Appelfeld, his traumatic experience with the sleep drug Halcion,
to name just some of the many details. He writes of the life that the public thinks they
know about Roth, be it from a shallow media knowledge to the most in-depth fan of Roth.
Roth even makes fun of this in-depth knowledge of him and his work in the character who
claims to also be Philip Roth. The other Philip Roth says,

You look at me as though I’m fawning, but it’s the truth—I know your books inside out.
I know your life inside out. I could be your biographer. I am your biographer. The insults
you’ve put up with, they drive me nuts just on your behalf. Portnoy’s Complaint; not even
nominated for a National Book Award! The book of the decade and not even nominated!
(OS, 73).

Here, Roth oﬀers a mirror of his work from a sympathetic perspective. His
grievances are aired not by him, but by a Roth devotee. The other Philip oﬀers the praise

32 of 50

and commiseration not of a critic, but of a supporter, of which in reality there are countless.
This obsessiveness is likely common to Roth, who ranks among the most awarded living
writers in America at the time of the writing of this thesis. Pipik’s obsession, for one, oﬀers
a glimpse of the celebrity life, adding a component of reality to the outlandishness of this
other Philip. Like the details that Roth himself personally emits in the text, this is an
example of a reaction that adds a feeling of reality to the text, that the reader is in Roth’s
world.
In The Counterlife, recollective “writer’s notes” written by Nathan Zuckerman
punctuate the “actual recollected story”—starkly diﬀerent aﬀairs. Roth juxtaposes
“fictitious” novel notes next to “real” novel notes. Here, in Operation Shylock, a grounded
interview between Roth and the novelist Aharon Appelfeld is interspersed with the
“nonsensical, crude, phantasmagorical farce” that is the rest of the book—obviously starkly
diﬀerent aﬀairs. The previous passage is an example of the Roth’s use of another verbal
formation to influence his own writing, perhaps as well as a way to bring this book closer to
the “real” (The excerpts of the conversation between Roth and Appelfeld are truly from an
interview between them published in The New York Times in 1988.) Because of its derivation
from the life of the supposedly real Roth, non-fictional intertextuality helps add veracity,
while not necessarily reality, to the account. The book information also does this, albeit in
an arguably cheesier way. Roth calls the book “a confession” and says, “For legal reasons, I
have had to alter a number of facts in this book” which he has “drawn…from notebook
journal” and “…is an accurate account as I am able to give of actual occurrences that I lived
through during my middle fifties…” (OS, 13).

33 of 50

In Philip Roth’s “Roth” novel Operation Shylock, the author places the novel—a device
made for fabrication—close to the “reality” of a person, something as small as several
hundred pages against something as complex as a person. Put another way, the signifier
(Roth) and the signified (his fiction) implode into almost one and the same. The two are
perhaps like a parabola that never touches its graph’s axis, or perhaps like a child quickly
dipping his wormed hook into a lake and then just as quickly yanking it out. Regardless of
graph lines or fishing lines, the lines Roth draws, particularly in Operation Shylock, are thin,
and, at least seemingly, easily crossable.
Midway through the novel, from the start of Section 8’s “The Uncontrollability of
Real Things” on page 239 until 248, it is hard, to put it simply, to tell what exactly is going
on. Is Roth giving up on this novel? Bowing out? Here not only is “Roth’s” control of the
fictionality of his work exposed, but the notion that it is indeed a written work as well. The
struggle of the writer, not just the fabricator comes out. Roth admits several times in
Operation Shylock the absurdity of the work, calling it into doubt and openly admitting its
risibly ludicrous basis. Roth lapses from a first- to third-person description of “the writer,” a
grammar he otherwise avoids in Operation Shylock. He starts summarizing the “Pipik plot so
far,” without any analysis or judgment of it, a way to recapitulate the story down to every
last detail. He writes detailedly, as if as a film treatment or summary for a publisher. He
writes, sentences like, “This is the plot up to the moment when the writer leaves the woman
still dolefully enmeshed in it,” and, “This is the question plaguing the writer as his taxi
carries him safely through Jerusalem’s western hills and onto the highway for the airport.”
The eﬀect is that the story comes across as absurd.

34 of 50

Roth criticizes the text and the story of Operation Shylock in very writerly ways. He
says the plot consists of a “…general implausibility, a total lack of gravity, reliance at too
many key points on unlikely coincidence, an absence of inner coherence, and not even the
most tenuous evidence of anything resembling a serious meaning or purpose.” He continues
his rampage, “The story so far is frivolously plotted, overplotted, for his taste altogether too
freakishly plotted, with outlandish events so wildly careening around every corner that there
is nowhere for intelligence to establish a foothold and develop a perspective” (OS, 245).
Roth continues his dismantling, “As if the look-alike at the story’s storm center isn’t
farfetched enough, there is the…fortuitous appearance of Louis B. Smilesburger himself,
Borscht Belt deus ex machina” (OS, 245). Roth teeters on and weaves narrowly a crisscross
between a real-seeming admittance and a traditional story. Regardless of if the real-seeming
admittance is actually real is besides the point, because the implication, the showing of the
unwritten perspective is enough to contrast the two viewpoints.
It seems as if “Roth” is skirting the line ever so closely to talking about his own
despair over the story’s foolishness, while not allowing total outward self-consciousness
destroy the conceit. Strangely, he is distracting the reader from the story in favor of an
analysis of the writing. He is denigrating the writing and admitting that the unruly character
of Pipik has taken control of the story. The thing has become a mess. This “Roth or
simulacrum of Roth or simulacrum of a writer—whatever the reader construes it as—makes
the written words arguably more important than what they describe, the story. Forget the
story, there is a crisis in the land of articulation and formation.

35 of 50

Even on the flip side, where Nathan could simply be describing a bizarre situation in
a writer’s terms (the way a football player describes the world in sports lingo or the lawyer in
legal jargon) the issue of authorial control is emphasized, because, technically, after all,
“Roth” here is the author and this book, as elucidated in the end, is his manuscript. Either
way, the control of the story is not just lost by the author, but rather thrown away.
However, when Roth, using his own name as a character who is like him in every
publicly knowable way, evaluates his own story, he at least provokes the question of diﬃculty
of writing a story. “It would be comforting,” he thinks, “… only natural, to assume that in a
narrative contest (in the realistic mode) with this impostor, the real writer would easily
emerge as inventive champion, scoring overwhelming victories in Sophistication of Means,
Subtlety of Eﬀects, Cunningness of Structure, Ironic Complexity, Intellectual Interest,
Psychological Credibility, Verbal Precision, and Overall Verisimilitude; but instead the
Jerusalem Gold Medal for Vivid Realism has gone to a narrative klutz who takes the cake for
wholesale indiﬀerence to the traditional criteria for judgment in every category of the
competition” (OS, 247). In a way, it seems like Roth is crossing the boundary between the
story and the examination of the story from the writer’s perspective. Again, the character
“Roth” is saying this and not Roth himself, but this passage, in my opinion, could be
construed as a judgment of his job handling the book up until this point. The idea that its
“Pipik’s story,” that “Roth” is “not writing this thing,” that “they are,” and that he doesn’t
“even exist” could be construed as kind of authorial failure (OS, 155). Except that “Roth” is
reactivated by an anti-Semitic comic and comes back to reign in the unruly literary cowboy
and form the story the rest of this story properly.

36 of 50

I believe that Roth, in a subtle way, admits not only the imaginary fictitiousness of
his text, but its written-ness. He drives the meaningfulness of the story as a character and its
stylistic structure as a writer. Perhaps this is part of what it is to be a writer-narrator, to
insert yourself into your fiction, without some of the buﬀers that come from writing a
“purer” fiction. Roth’s writing is messy. He is not the only writer who focuses attention on
the process of writing, on the discrepancies not between real and fake, but between fake and
fake, and can turn that into a compelling, interesting juxtaposition.
Arguably, Roth is playing with what Pipik would call a “dissimulation, two-facedness,
a secretiveness.” Is the reader to believe that Roth divulges the real Roth onto the pages in
Operation Shylock, even despite that name being doubly emphasized? And why is it doubly
emphasized? Because Roth not only reveals presumably real and private information about
his life, but the plot of Operation Shylock involves a “fake” Philip Roth. Roth hence in the
book makes the distinction between the two, calling himself the “real” Philip. Roth hence
accentuates, before the reader’s proverbial and literal eyes, a trick of distraction, part of his
Rothian legerdermain of who really is this man who writes books in Connecticut? The
reader suddenly takes for granted more of what he says about himself because it is being
compared with an obvious false version. If Roth had presented a straightly “real” narrative,
perhaps the reader would be more likely to scrutinize the account for accuracy. As Pipik
says, “So convincing one way—just like you when you write—and then, the next moment,
someone will walk out of the room, they’ll turn around and be just the opposite.” Is Roth
convincing the reader as he writes, while when he walks out of the room he is someone
diﬀerent? Regardless of the answer, what is his reason in provoking this question in the first
place? Roth wants make the writer a thing unto itself, to encapsulate himself fully,
37 of 50

hermetically sealed, as an entity alone in a dark galaxy. Roth is writing himself into a corner
radically. He is painting himself in his ostensibly fullest, most detailed image.

Can the reader trust this giving, revealing narrator, a narrator eponymous to the
name of the writer on the cover of the book? Can it really be imagined that Roth is writing
autofiction? Roth writes voyeuristically fun details about his life inside of a bizarre,
unbelievable plot. The biographical, presumably true facts are up for grabs as items of truth
or falseness without the fantastical story, but with them they are now under the same veil of
fictitiousness as the rest. Except that may also be false. The biographical statements that
Roth knocks could actually be all the more real-seeming because of the outlandish of the
plot. More happening, less focus. Magician Technique 101.
In a sense, Roth is excessively “informing” on himself—on his most private problems,
like his battle for his sanity with Halcion, his feelings towards his emotionally-stunted
cousin, and his blunt thoughts about his dead wife. Pipik says of the Arabs: “They don’t
think that other people have to know what is really on their minds;” however, Jews tell
“everything that’s on their minds to everyone nonstop.”8 Is Roth collaborating with the
reading public, with his prestige as a writer, with his chances of the Nobel Prize when he
writes the dirt about himself in a fictitious format and not in a memoir? Pipik says, “You
really should not be so quick to slit the throats of your collaborators when collaborating is
one of your society’s most estimable achievements.” Definitely it is true that Roth has won
some of the English-speaking world’s most estimable achievements.

Reminiscent of how Carol is described when delivering the eulogy of Henry in The Counterlife: “Many people
wouldn’t have felt the same need that she did to be open and honest about something so personal.”
8

38 of 50

Of course, Roth writes about the sacrifices he has submitted as a result of the
writerly life. His personal disclosures partially make his fiction what it is. He has made his
career through his collaborative eﬀorts with the novel and a public interested enough to
read them, eﬀorts to strip himself down, to analyze himself free of neuroses or to
understand himself. “Amazing,” the character Philip Roth says, “that something as tiny,
really, as a self should contain contending subselves—and that these subselves should
themselves be constructed of subselves, and on and on and on” (OS, ). Roth has
deoconstructed his subselves and his personas as a career, his public persona and his
presumably private self and how they influence one the other. Roth has collaborated with
his selves, even if its his public persona conversing with his fictional persona. A collaborative
eﬀort to birth fundamental truths. As the novelist Porochista Khapour says, few writers
have mined themselves as a subject as much as Philip Roth.9
Many writers use their own experiences to inform their work, but, when he uses his
own name in the work, Roth utilizes fewer pretenses than a more traditional novelist using a
patently fictional character. If he uses his name as a character, he is still using his own name,
and this automatically is a factor in the story, no matter if the nearly biographically identical
writer Philip Roth in Operation Shylock is diﬀerent from the real, real Philip Roth who lives
in. What Roth purports in the following excerpt from his Paris Review interview, and which
coincides with his frequent devaluation of the fantastical for the close-to-home, is a focus
on the irrelevance of his subject matter in favor of an analysis closely and innovatively of the
subject:

9

Khakpour, Porochista. Personal conversation. February 17, 2015.

39 of 50

As you well know, the intriguing biographical issue—and critical issue, for that matter—
isn’t that a writer will write about some of what has happened to him, but how he writes
about it, which, when understood properly, takes us a long way to understanding why he
writes about it. A more intriguing question is why and how he writes about what hasn’t
happened—how he feeds what’s hypothetical or imagined into what’s inspired and
controlled by recollection, and how what’s recollected spawns the overall fantasy (Paris
Review, No. 84).

It seems Roth wants to showcase a thinner line between himself and his fiction. There is a
long passage in Operation Shylock where Roth does this. In a scene where Roth explains his
revulsion of and competition with Pipik, as well as his wish to transcend their unsought
after relationship, Roth weaves in between the written and the unwritten worlds—not
because he relays information that is provably truthful, because that is impossible, but
because he actually gives into a discussion about writing, and a discussion about writing
quite similar to what could be called the critical pitfalls of his novel up until that point.

40 of 50

Conclusion
By employing writer as narrator, including himself, Roth can come to know better
the diﬀerences between the written and unwritten worlds. It is a simple technique for a
diﬃcult enterprise. Use like for like. The best answer to question is to use the same
currency, the same denomination. As Pipik virulently says to Roth, “Subtraction is one of
the four fundamental operations of arithmetic. Let me refresh your recollection. It is the
inverse of addition. The result of subtracting one number from another is called the
diﬀerence. The symbol for this operation is our friend the minus sign. Any of this ring a
bell? As in addition, only like qualities can be subtracted. Dollars from dollars, for instance,
work very nicely. Dollars from dollars, Phil, is what subtraction was made for.” There is a
surprisingly elegant eﬃcacy to inserting as a Virgil to explore the dynamic relationship of
the written and the unwritten a writer.
In the case of Operation Shylock, using as narrator who is a writer as good as Philip
Roth—because that narrator is supposed to be “Philip Roth”—he can do this, and that is
perhaps another iteration perhaps one possible reason why Philip Roth chose to use the
character “Philip Roth.”
In Operation Shylock, Roth has transformed the idea of “authorial presence.” In no
way is it a problem to be steered away from, but rather Roth’s authorial insertions are one of
the defining, masterful parts of his fiction. Henry James, an author whose works critics and
Roth himself compare to Roth’s early work like Letting Go (1962) and When She Was Good
(1967), had an interest in realism that never led the novelist of this project to the “notion
that all signs of the author’s presence are inartistic.” However, in Roth’s Zuckerman and
41 of 50

particularly “Roth” books, the author actually made his presence a signature of exacting
artistry, rather than an instrument to be merely avoided as potentially “inartistic.” If James’s
“interest is not negative—how to get rid of the author—but positive: how to achieve an
illusion of reality, including the complexities of mental and moral reality,” Roth’s interest is
vastly positive: his presence is not an unavoidable concession or even a witty conceit of a
fiction writer to his or her novel as part of a larger narrative, but rather, in many of his
books, the entire construct of his narrative. Roth unabashedly traverses between the
supposed written and the unwritten without a reservation as to whether that breaks the
rules of fiction. It is one thing to incorporate the “writer” into a work of fiction; it is another
to make the written life the exploration itself. Roth does not feign that exploration of the
self is only achievable via the “realistic” facade of ordinariness. His fiction amazingly yields
no fewer results than a narrative which purports, through one means or another, a
knowledge of the life beyond the cloistered existence of the writer and behind the keyboard.
He exploits his writerliness, not buries it.
Roth’s technique and subject of writing about writing and writers is, actually, just as
taboo as his writings about sex, religion, or death. An introductory creative writing teacher,
for instance, might prohibit “writing about writing” as a copout. For the novice fiction
writer, metafictional self-consciousness is a rookie, even “lazy” move; a metafictional selfconsciousness is deemed a hurdle before reaching one’s “real” subject. A most basic example
of this type is a story that begins with a writer faced by a blank computer screen, halted by
“writer’s block.”

42 of 50

“Writing about writing” is dangerous for a writer because it approaches on one side a
superficially pleasing meta-ness and on the other gimmickry. Too simple or too daunting,
Roth’s choice encounters a field of possible pitfalls: itself self-limiting, paralyzing, a hall-ofmirrors eﬀect, not “escapist,” but not “realistic” either. It might be excessively selfreferential, making it a brain exercise for the reader, or come across as a flashy intellectual
demonstration instead of a purposeful route to a meaningful destination. A ludicrously
obvious self-portrait or an artfully concocted persona? Perhaps the answer is a skilled
interplay of the two: straight man, funny man; real man, imaginary man, but almost always
caricature, caricature. Because no matter what character it is in The Counterlife and Operation
Shylock, and I believe Philip Roth would be the first to admit it, the straight man is just as
fake as the funny man. There are no “real” characters in either of these books, and Roth’s
manipulations of fiction
There are infinitely many reasons why most novels look through the eyes of nonwriter narrators; there are less reasons, however, why they should look through the eyes of
an author. For a regular non-writer narrator, the possibilities are endless, juicy, and rich: the
extended metaphors available (for example, life as the idealization of a house for an
architect…), the host of surrounding characters gettable (…the engineer who actualizes and
limits, the painter who covers up, the builder who takes too long), or the symbolisms ready
to be plucked (…nails as spikes that ultimately build).
Conventional professions for narrators are as common as they are diverse: a
fisherman, a baseball player, a puppeteer, a homemaker, a professor, a criminal, a detective,
an actor, a painter, an inventor. So are diﬀerent types: a lothario, an addict, a failure, a

43 of 50

fantasist, an apostate, a historical figment, an attitude embodied, a stereotype, a comical
type, an idiosyncratic type. In his career, Roth has indeed used many writer characters: for
examples, a puppeteer in Sabbath’s Theater (1995), a baseball player in The Great American
Novel (1973), a lothario and/or professor in many10. And of course, the characters that
populate Roth’s novels are always complex and not exclusive to one of these categorizations.
Even when the narrator is a writer, he is, like any good character or any real human being,
multifaceted. The point, however, is that out of the infinity of narrators, Roth has
steadfastly returned to his writer. Some authors recur detectives, Roth revisits the novelist.
Dangerously, though, Roth most signature move is to write, either in The Counterlife
or Operation Shylock, from the perspective of a writer. The benefits of the choice are almost
unwieldily powerful because a writer can comment, interact, or play with the very aspects of
the medium which the reader is holding: the bound book constructed of glue, paper, page
numbers, Library of Congress cataloging information, copyright data, sometimes string in
the case of hardbacks. Writers are, literally, the masters of the form in hand. This type of
writerly novel does maintains promise for a well-deserved intra-medium connectivity in a
form of writing often unsure about its own existence.
Roth in this sense is a provocateur not in the sexual sense, but in the writerly sense.
His technique and subject of writing about the written, the fictional, and, most generally,
the verbal is actually just as taboo as his writings about sex, religion, or death (although his
verbal taboo cracking complements the latter). I would roughly compare it to the abolition
of the fourth wall in theater, except in Roth’s case, it is not really the fourth wall he takes

44 of 50

down in The Counterlife and Operation Shylock, but rather something like a ceiling and the
roof.

Perhaps Aharon’s answer to one of Roth’s questions in Operation Shylock can give one
possible reason why Roth, a writer who has often written so seemingly close to the “real,”
has never given in totally to it, into what is today called “autofiction.” Appelfeld says:
I tried several times to write “the story of my life”…But all my eﬀorts were in vain. I wanted
to be faithful to reality and to what really happened. But the chronicle that emerged proved
to be a weak scaﬀolding. The result was rather meager, an unconvincing imaginary tale. The
things that are most true are easily falsified (OS, 86).

Undoubtedly, at least in my opinion, fiction has benefits vaster than attempts at “true” on
the self can ever achieve; however, it has often been, for many writers, a limiting hew of the
fiction medium to transcend itself fully, perhaps because it—its writers, that is, have been
afraid of its own self-perceived restrictions. “Fiction” cannot look in the mirror without
being frightened of itself. It cannot inspect itself too closely without becoming invisible to
itself.
Roth’s choice of narrator is daring because it pits a writer seemingly as close to a
story as possible without falling into autobiography, autofiction, or just non-fiction. In The
Counterlife and Operation Shylock, he goes to the far edges of fiction, and makes a home there.
More than that, he breaches those borders, and reveals new lands. Writing like he does is a
sort of one-to-one writer-novel ratio that ups the stakes for technique and function. Roth,
by writing about himself fictionally with loads of personal details, makes himself much more
vulnerable than if he were writing about, say, a fisherman from Nebraska named Thomas,
but because of his decision to do the the former, he also has new tools and can build higher

45 of 50

with them, than if he were writing about a fisherman from Nebraska named Thomas. Roth
matches fire with fire. With it, he forges exceptional creations.

Facing oﬀ a novel and a novel-writing narrator requires virtues: courage, restraint,
reason. Roth is: courageous because his choice is easily fallible; restrained because he
maintains a course or purpose on top of “merely” mathematical examination of diﬀerent
metaphysical dimensions; and rational because his decision to employ a writer-narrator
above all has been too consistently focused to suppose an objective other than purely
intentional. Roth did not put the cart before the horse with the Zuckerman and “Roth”
novels. They are not happy accidents, and they are not one-oﬀs. Positively, they are
sustained, extremely deliberate explorations through Roth has decided that a writer-narrator
is the best way to investigate. His sjuzhet is a legerdemain with a very skewed and dynamic
series of emphases, de-emphases. He emphasizes the presentation by the narrator, and how
that narrator interacts with the story, over the story itself. That is how most fiction works:
the narrator interacts with the story, simple enough. But Roth
——————————
When Henry has his breakdown in The Counterlife, he sees words: When his wife Carol
asks him what’s wrong, he replied blankly with the words, “It’s staring me right in the face.”
“What is?”…Tell me, darling, and we’ll talk about it. What is staring you right in the face?”,
she asked. “‘The words,’ he angrily told her, ‘the words ‘it’s staring you right in the face’!’”
When Nathan has his breakdown in Operation Shylock, and his “mind began to
disintegrate,” the “word DISINTEGRATION seemed itself to be the matter” out of which
his brain was constituted.” They “began spontaneously coming apart,” and the “fourteen
46 of 50

letters, big, chunky, irregularly sized components of my brain, elaborately intertwined, tore
jaggedly loose from one another, sometimes a fragment of a letter at a time, but usually in
painfully unpronounceable nonsyllabic segments of two or three, their edges roughly
serrated.”
The characters and their lives in The Counterlife and Operation Shylock, examples of a
Zuckerman novel and a “Roth” novel, respectively, are heavily aﬀected by words and more
generally by the verbal—in these two cases of characters’ breakdowns, literally. Furthermore,
Roth exposes the written as a form that is forever independent of anything else. Roth’s
method to makes these eﬀects is to place the written over the imaginary, employing a writernarrator and by intentionally exposing the fictional world for what it is: fiction. In doing so,
Roth opens the possibilities of the medium, eliminates the idea of its fragility, and hence
robustly, vigorously exercises it. His results are numerous, but mostly that a relationship
with the author, even if it is itself feigned, can enhance the written work.
Roth’s work investigates the diﬀerences between the written and the unwritten, the
real and the supposed, the unfortunate and the hoped for, the potential for greatness and
the outcome of failure, possibility and finality. Roth uses the novel to undo finality. With it,
he shows other possible worlds and the self-madeness of both inner and outer lives. Roth
hits against both predestination and free will. The human mind is an inventive apparatus
just like a writer’s. It decides its future, examines its past, and manages the best it can with
its present. It scrutinizes, contemplates, and fantasizes about the lives of others.
The question Roth perpetually faces is whether he paints the man in the mirror or
the man others paint him to be. The warped, incorrect image from the public mirror is, I
47 of 50

think, a closer description. Roth has painted image after image of a life collected by
experiences produced behind a keyboard and refracted back to him. His conscientiousness
of this could not be keener or more excited by its possibilities.
The quality of Roth’s writing alone carries him to reality: even in his most outlandish
scenes or constructs, a mundaneness remains. Roth’s fiction is never fantastical, even when
it is implausible, and it is not slapstick, even when it is ridiculous. Roth hews the edge of a
realistic genre by always aiming his works at the target of purposeful discovery, even if it
comes in ostensibly roundabout ways. Despite its fantasy, Roth’s works is grounded, human,
physics-abiding, and skeptical, as well as conscious of its own existence. Though he might
have agreed with Ford Madox Ford that the reader should feel that he has been ‘really
there,’ he would never have suggested that the reader must entirely forget the guiding
presence of the author. (50).11
The recent literary phenomenon Karl Ove Knausgaard has apparently redefined the
literary world with his new auto fiction, a hybrid between autobiography and fiction. In a
recent review of his latest installment of his 3,500 page, six book series, Jeﬀrey Eugenides
wrote, “He doesn’t lie or make things up (so far as I know). But the selection process he
subjects his memories to in order to fulfill the narrative demands of his writing rises to a
level of considerable artifice. His raw materials are more authentic (maybe), but the
products they create no less artful. Knausgaard has found a way to suspend the reader’s
disbelief at a time when that suspension is harder to accomplish. His technique is so
cunning that the reader doesn’t even notice” (Eugenides). Philip Roth found a way to un-

48 of 50

suspend his reader’s disbelief, to disrupt it, to exploit it, all in the medium of fiction, and
hence found truths that neither a fable nor an autobiography could deliver.

The verbal life aﬀects us all. Life happening is unwritten, but most of life acted upon is
written—usually in our minds, sometimes on paper. What people say eﬀects us, what we say
eﬀects others. It eﬀects our own future. How we curate sentences and choose words makes
for an infinity of outcomes. To put it simply, verbal formations form us. We all strive to
control our lives, and the writer Philip Roth is no diﬀerent. He is one of the best examples
of one who articulates and alters, transforming life into words which can reflect back to us
more strongly than the original event, or can impregnate, and if nurtured properly, give birth
to newness.
No art besides the written can claim verb tenses. Words have. Words do. Words will.
They define and redefine the past, present, and future many times over again. Among all of
Roth’s triumphs in his fictions, one is in exposing the possibilities and powers of the the
verbal within the medium, and using it is as the device that it can be, not just a recording of
stories, even good stories, but an element and an art unto itself. He has innovated processes
of morphing texts; he has explored transformation comically and cruelly in character and
content, and with genius in form. He allowed himself to recognize that what is put into
words can be pliable, and is always forceful: a fiction writer par excellence, contending not only
with the course of a single star, but with its force within the universe. No matter how
painful his subject matter can sometimes be, he appears, from the two fine representations
from his writer-narrator novels discussed here, a proponent of free will rather than
predestination, of creativity rather than passivity, and overall, of agency.

49 of 50

Bibliography
Borges, Jorge Luis. “The Garden of Forking Paths.” University of Bern. 1941. http://
wsblog.iash.unibe.ch/wp-content/uploads/Borges_The-Garden-of-Forking-Paths.pdf
Eugenides, Jeffrey. “Karl Ove Knausgaard’s ‘My Struggle: Book 4.’” The New York Times. April
23, 2015. http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/26/books/review/jeffrey-eugenides-reviewsmy-struggle-by-karl-ove-knausgaard.html?
hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&module=mini-moth&region=top-storiesbelow&WT.nav=top-stories-below
Roth, Philip. Operation Shylock. Random House: New York, 1993.
Roth, Philip. “Writing About Jews.” Commentary. 1963. https://
www.commentarymagazine.com/article/writing-about-jews/
Roth, Philip. The Counterlife. Farrar Straus Giroux: New York, 1986.

50 of 50

