Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

Poor Old Horse: Tragicomedy and The Good
Soldier
Matthew Christian
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Christian, Matthew, "Poor Old Horse: Tragicomedy and The Good Soldier" (2011). Senior Projects Spring 2011. Paper 18.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/18

This Open Access is brought to you for free and open access by the Bard
Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2011 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Poor Old Horse: Tragicomedy and The Good Soldier

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Literature
Of Bard College
by
Matthew Christian

Annandale-On-Hudson, New York
May 2011

You say you are a better soldier:
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well: for mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of abler men.
Shakespeare, Julius Caesar

Table of Contents

1

Introduction

12

Chapter I: 'Small wonder that one should be tired out':
Literary Impressionism and The Good Soldier

33

Chapter II: 'Les faiz, gestes, triumphes et prouesses du Bon Chevalier':
Ashburnham, Dowell, and the Feudal

55

Chapter III: 'Orgueil et aberration':
Retaking The Good Soldier as Comedy

78

Conclusion

1

Introduction

He had been cheerful at tea, but in Squerries Park a mood of melancholy stole over
him, and he sang me one melancholy song after another, some French, some German,
ending with the Westmorland folksong Poor Old Horse. Ford's voice was not bad, his
ear was good, and the expression he put into the words of the horse's cruel master was
pathetic in the extreme. … [Then] in the most unhappy voice Ford broke in to say
something like this: “I am that poor old horse, David. … Once I was a brilliant young
poet, a famous writer … now I am no more use to anyone and they kick me, now they
have got me down. … Poor old horse …” I was in tears and, seeing this, Ford wept
also; then brushed his tears aside for a moment to look at his watch and make sure that
he was not late for his train.
(David Garnett, quoted in Arthur Mizener's
biography The Saddest Story)
Ford Madox Ford was a writer gifted, by all accounts, with a preternatural sensibility for
sadness. Indeed, if this sense of melancholy were evenly matched by any other quality, it could
only have been his urge to share it; and Garnett's recollection shows this in all its force. Here, we
see Ford pulling out all the stops in expressing his sadness—and we can easily believe that,
hearing his gradual descent into musical pathos and his tearful identification with the poor,
abused animal, his listener must have broken into tears along with him.
And yet that moment Garnett, at least, is immediately jerked back out of this emotional
resonance. The smallest of actions intervenes: Ford pauses briefly, perhaps even unconsciously,
to check the time; and if we take the suggestion implicit in Garnett's qualifier “for a moment,” he
turns back immediately to weeping. We have no record of Ford's experience of the event, but
Garnett, it seems, was taken aback: it is clear that for him and for Mizener, it revealed—subtly,

2
and perhaps not even consciously—some curiously important attribute of Ford's. What is clear is
that Garnett was surprised that Ford, in the midst of his tears, would think to check the time: it
was, given Ford's emotional fervor, incongruous; and it seems that Garnett, taken aback, was
suddenly made conscious of his own emotional state. He was in tears along with Ford; and yet
when he sees Ford pause to check his watch, he finds himself suddenly distanced from the
sorrow that he had just been experiencing, and reticent or unable authentically to return to it.
In any case, it does not appear from Garnett's telling that Ford experienced the same
emotional detachment. On the contrary, might it be that the micro-comedy of his dependence on
the train schedule in the midst of his despair even contributed to Ford's melancholy? Is there not
a sense, in the Fordian worldview, in which he was fate's victim in being reduced to such
baseness—in which he could not even experience the full sadness of his own tragic condition
without being interrupted by the vulgar, humiliating necessity of observing railroad time?
If this reading rightly understands the sequences of events at Squerries Park, then, it
would suggest that Ford's sensitivity to the tragic retained a surprising ability to coexist, not only
with practical concerns, but with even with a consciousness of the element of comedy in his own
melancholy. Indeed, it seems the one almost leads into the other: overcome by sadness over his
writing career, Ford, suddenly reminded that he was still subject to the laws of train departures,
could not have helped but notice the disjunction between his grand misery and continued daily
necessity; and this inability fully to submerge himself into that tragedy—always pulled back by
self-awareness—must only have contributed to his sense of misery.

The Good Soldier has, it seems, more than a little in common with Ford's afternoon in

3
Squerries Park. Certainly, it possesses a more-than-sufficient dose of tragic elements: adultery
and betrayal among its major characters; multiple suicides, heart failure, and insanity; and a
series of tepid, maudlin affairs. Yet it is also marked by the same ever-present awareness of
comic potential seen in Garnett's remembrance: at each seemingly tragic moment, the novel stops
for a moment, wiping away its tears as though to check the time. This self-awareness prevents
the text—perhaps ultimately—from occasioning real sadness: it seems that comedy subtly and
effectively undermines tragic representation and fundamental impedes the on-looker—Garnett,
in one case; and the reader in the other—from being moved in sympathy with Ford's emotional
claims.
What is the relation between laughter and sadness in The Good Soldier, then? Is the comic
an impediment to the tragic—or better put, does comic treatment subtly anesthetize tragedy,
preventing any sadness from being felt in a text that, by its own estimation, should be “the
Saddest Story?” Or does Ford still reserve—at the very close of this tragicomedy, or perhaps
even beyond its boundary—the possibility of an authentic sadness?

The Good Soldier is the story of two well-to-do couples and the events that occur among
them them over the course of a decade. Edward Ashburnham—the title character—is a British
officer, retired due to heart trouble, and the owner of an English manor. He is generous, honest,
masculine, and apparently universally attractive to those around him; he is also slightly slowwitted, a reader of sentimental novels, and is perpetually engaged in a long series of affairs. His
wife, Leonora, is the daughter of an economically struggling Irish Catholic family; she attempts

4
to keep the Ashburnhams financially sound against the costs of Edward's affairs, and has all but
given up on regaining his fidelity. Their marriage is a sustained struggle between two ideologies,
Ashburnham's 'knightly' generosity and disposition to romance, and Leonora's commitment to
economy, stability, and respectability.
The Ashburnhams are paired up in a lengthy social bond with John Dowell and his wife
Florence. Florence, a Vassar graduate, is Ford's portrait of the 'bright young American,'
perennially giving little historical lessons to the Ashburnhams during their travels through the
Continent. Sea travel and the consummation of her marriage are both forbidden to her by an
(invented) heart condition—which she uses as cover for her long-standing affair with Edward,
the novel's other 'heart-sick' protagonist. There is also a persistent gap, in each character, between
outward self-representation and (often significantly more base) interior motivation. Thus
Florence's love of education and care for those around her conceals her two affairs; Leonora's
dedication to her husband rests upon a more fundamental obsession with keeping their household
economically solvent; and Edward's self-image as a dashing hero and incorrigible romantic
belies the fantastic, almost school-boyish shallowness of his conception of love—a conception
he transfers readily, even ready-made, to each interchangeable lover.
Importantly, much of this information is not initially known to Dowell, the text's narrator.
While Leonora is aware of Edward and Florence's affair throughout its duration, for instance,
Dowell discovers it only later. The plot arc is therefore partly epistemological: the novel
progresses simultaneously through its primary plot action and through Dowell's retrospective
realizations of the story.
Within the fiction framework, then, The Good Soldier is Dowell's written summary of the

5
two couples' relationship: in effect, Dowell is the text's narrator. He is, further, an extremely
visible narrator: he pieces together the plot events as the text advances, gradually recognizing the
various deceptions and false appearances by which he had been taken in. In addition, he is not
reticent to make emotional demands upon the reader: Dowell opens with the famous claim that
“This is the saddest story I have ever heard;” and far from dry summary, his narrative
consistently insists upon the sadness, tragedy, tearfulness of the events that it relates.
The core of the novel's action is constituted by the characters already mentioned. The
passing characters are tied to the narrative largely as romantic objects or in brief segues into
back-history by Dowell—Edward, for instance, has had affairs or attachments with a number of
women, including a servant-girl in England, a Spanish dancer at a casino, and the wife of a major
in the British army. Florence, meanwhile, has had her own previous affair with a talentless,
unappealing American painter named Jimmy. The one remaining major character bears mention:
the Ashburnham's young ward Nancy, who eventually becomes another object of Edward's
romantic desire during the novel's lengthy denouement.
Were a narrative arc to be traced for the novel, it would be essentially binary. On one
side, there would be the plot action of the novel, of which the core is the struggle between
Edward and Leonora, the relationship between Edward and Florence, the inadvertent discovery
of that relationship by Dowell, Florence's suicide, Edward's confession of romantic desire to
Nancy—as overheard by Leonora—and Edward's final suicide after Nancy is sent back to her
father in India in the throes of a mental breakdown. On the other, there is Dowell's
epistemological progression through the novel, the concomitant changes and reversals in his
estimations of the other characters, and the gradual evolution of his perspectives on society and

6
love.
It is, in short, a novel full to bursting with characters and plot events, all in a relatively
short narrative space. One imagines, on the basis of this summary, a novel that draws the reader
into its plot—and into identification, hatred, or attachment with regard to its characters. In brief,
one imagines that The Good Soldier will perform what Walter Benjamin has written of the novel:
that
the novel is significant … not because it presents someone else's fate to us, perhaps
didactically, but because this stranger's fate by virtue of the flame which consumes it
yields us the warmth which we never draw from our own fate. What draws the reader to
the novel is the hope of warming his shivering life with a death he reads about (“The
Storyteller,” 101).
The events of The Good Soldier, as they lead the characters inexorably toward the ends of their
lives, must inscribe the action of those lives in a sort of meaningful framework: it is the effect of
narrative itself to give direction, causality, and 'sense' to a jumbled web of action. Or to put
Benjamin's claim—perhaps ever so slightly unjustly—in Fordian terms: to narrate a story means
to invest into it an fundamental, inseparable emotional valuation. Events become a story at the
moment they gain the ability, retold in their logical ensemble, to bring tears to the eyes of the
reader.
And yet here The Good Soldier is precisely opposed to Benjamin's conception: it is a
novel that refuses to give (narrative, moral, prescriptive) sense to its contents. The narrative
structure—Dowell's often wandering retrospective account of the story—breaks up the plot arc;
and it is difficult to identify any outstanding moments of tension, action, or resolution. Above all,
there is not, at the novel's close, the sense of narrative conclusion or calm one expects from a
story. It is precisely as Dowell writes:

7
I call this the Saddest Story, rather than “The Ashburnham Tragedy”, just because it is
so sad, just because there was no current to draw things along to a swift and inevitable
end. There is about it none of the elevation that accompanies tragedy; there is about it no
nemesis, no destiny. Here were two noble people—for I am convinced that both Edward
and Leonora had noble natures—here then, were two noble natures, drifting down life,
like fire-ships afloat on a lagoon and causing miseries, heart-aches, agony of the mind
and death. And they themselves steadily deteriorated? And why? For what purpose? To
point what lesson? It is all a darkness (109).
Thus 'fate,' the essential function of the Benjamin novel—and the function which would
constitute a normative interpretive strategy—is rejected absolutely in The Good Soldier:
Dowell's 'lack of current' is the precise opposite term to Benjamin's 'fate.' The novel does not
bring the peacefulness immanent in a narrative conclusion; it refuses to give any final sense,
beyond a sort of regretful horror, to the lives of its characters. Ultimately, the image provided by
The Good Soldier is not the stylization of a meaningful life, but an insistence on meaningless
life, life that is specifically unworthy of artistic representation, for its rereading offers nothing.
If it is not a stream but, in Dowell's term, a lagoon, The Good Soldier is thus directly
opposed to Benjamin's conception of the novel: it fiercely resists investing any meaning into its
plot action. One could say even that it attempts, through its complex, fragmented narrative
structure and its constant reversals of character descriptions, to render the plot as a mere jumble
of events rather than a fluent, causal narrative—thus resisting the Benjamian transformation into
'story.' Or, put, in Fordian terms, that it refuses to inject emotion into the progression of events:
Ford's intention is that the reader come away from Dowell's narration unmoved. This lack of
emotion is the sign of a meaningless narrative: if the reader is not drawn into sharing the value
ascribed to each character, object, and event by the narrator, he will be unable, at the close, to
feel its corresponding loss. And is not the moment of laughter—the moment in which Garnett,
seeing Ford pause in the midst of absolute woe to check his watch, suddenly feels played for a

8
fool for having cried along with him—the moment where the emotion that narrative injects into
events is most threatened?
If it insists on calling this emotion into question through laughter, then, The Good Soldier
gravely risks wiping out the 'meaning' of its plot—that is, it risks absolutely alienating the reader
from his investment into the story. The only conclusion, then, is that The Good Soldier is not
available to Benjaminian criticism. Considering plot action in search of some sense or
illumination there cannot assist this reading, because it was precisely Ford's point that nothing
was there to be found.
Rather, what is vital is this absence itself. If Dowell's narration could not, in the end, loan
any sense to these sense-impoverished lives, what does that mean for modernist narrative itself?
Did the life-stories of Ford's world—the life-stories of retired Edwardian officers and their wives
—offer material that could be, in Benjamin's image, consumed in the novel's flame and give
warmth to its reader?
What The Good Soldier really treats, then, is not plot but the narrative process itself. It is
one step separated from a narration of the events of human lives: instead its primary focus is a
treatment of the effort to give that narration. The Good Soldier is a novel of narrative: what it
really 'does' as a fictional text is not to tell human stories, but to consider in detail the teller of
one such story, and to judge the success or failure of his telling.

In the following chapter, in preparation for a reading of The Good Soldier, I describe the
relationship between the novel and Ford's major contemporary critical text, “On Impressionism.”
It is my thesis there that beneath its vocabulary of “technique” and “craftsmanship” for the

9
purpose of entertainment, “On Impressionism” gives important clues to Ford's artistic endeavor
in The Good Soldier. Particularly, it will suggest Ford's crucial awareness of the risks and
instabilities of the Impressionist approach that, I will argue, defines Dowell's writing method. In
“On Impressionism,” Ford is particularly attuned to the comic implications of his method: in
reading the text carefully, it will seem that Ford even suggests that the most literal Impressionism
can only result in humor when narrating an otherwise tragic story, and that the comedy that stems
from this failed attempt at tragedy represents the most threatening implications of laughter for
literary narrative. This fundamental ligature—or even inseparability—between Impressionist
narratives of tragedy and the sudden comic element that appears in them, I will argue, defines
Ford's case-study of Impressionist narrative in The Good Soldier.
In the second chapter, I will consider Ford's relationship to feudal ideology, focusing on
the implications of that relationship for the title and 'key' of the text, “The Good Soldier.”
Through a discussion of the connotations and conventions of the feudal, I will consider to what
degree Edward embodies the construct of 'The Good Soldier' and to what degree he falls short of
it. Though it is axiomatic here that Edward does not succeed in representing 'The Good Soldier,'
a reading of that failure is still vitally necessary. For instance: to what degree does Edward's
character remain appealing—that is, to what degree does Ford remain invested in his nobility or
value? And, how is Edward's failure to represent 'The Good Soldier' related to the comic
potential of the novel? Is the failure to adequately embody the expectations of Ford's 'feudal
background' a central source of this comedy?
This question, though focusing most particularly on a reading of Edward and of the
significance of the title itself, touches on many of the novel's major themes—for instance

10
nobility, soldiery, romance, charity, sacrifice, suicide—terms that seem often to be connoted by
or associated with the feudal. Where possible I will identify the traditions and conventions
implicated in the novel, and show Ford's construction of his narrative's systematic failure to
satisfy conventional expectations. This failure will be consider particularly in light of its comic
value: the fundamental question will be to what degree the 'tragic' themes of The Good Soldier
become ironic through their juxtaposition with conventional expectations. It is my wager here
that Ford's careful construction of these failures or 'fallings-short' constitutes the organizational
principle of the novel, an organizational principle that is essentially comic.
The third chapter will further develop a theoretical account of the effects of comedy in
Ford's novel. Through a reading of Aristotle and Baudelaire, I hope to resituate Ford's sense of
the comic not as a instrument meant to entertain, but as a more fundamental 'trembling' of the
tragic, the serious, and the ethical. Applying Baudelaire's conception of laughter to The Good
Soldier, I will argue that it is Dowell's own 'valuation' of his peers that is progressively lost in the
text's comedy, ultimately denying Dowell—and the reader—an experience of loss at the close of
the text.
This theoretical argumentation will be used to consider several comic passages in The
Good Soldier, showing that moments that appear to be mere comic 'entertainment' point upon
closer consideration directly toward the comic inadequacies or 'shortfalls' identified in the second
chapter, arguing that Dowell's comic treatment of those characters to whom he is least attached
spreads pervasively into the subjects most important to him—virtue, soldiery, and Ashburnham
himself. For this reason, comedy ultimately arrives at a complete undermining of Dowell's claim
that the novel is “the Saddest Story:” indeed at the close of his narrative, I will argue, there is

11
literally no sadness at all, an absence that defines The Good Soldier's perspective on modern
tragedy and tragic representation.
In a brief conclusion, I will offer a final discussion of the effects of this 'absence of
sadness' from a text that insists so heavily upon its tragic qualities. Does comedy itself ultimately
produce a 'tragedy of detachment' at the close of the novel? Even in spite of—or because of—the
novel's comic treatment of tragic events, there is at its close an enormous sadness in Dowell's
inability to portray himself as having suffered real loss. This suffering because of the failure of
tragedy may itself, as Ford had found in the opening passage here, be a cause of sadness. I will
thus argue that this final, sudden turn towards the 'tragedy of the comedy' may be what
Baudelaire describes as the “élément insaisissable du beau” present in comedy: even as The
Good Soldier succeeds in eliminating the experience of the tragic from its narrative, it discovers
another, perhaps more profound sorrow in that absence itself.

12

Chapter I
'Small wonder that one should be tired out': Literary Impressionism and The Good Soldier
L'on en parle jusqu'à la nausée.1
Jean Paulhan, Les fleurs de Tarbes.

A common point of departure for readers of The Good Soldier is the gap between Ford's
position as author and Dowell's as narrator. Dowell is, to a large extent, faulty: his narration is
wandering, emotionally affected, and often self-contradictory. Further, he insists on the tragic
power of his text—thus opening a discontinuity with the reader's experience. At the moments
where Dowell most insists upon the overwhelming sadness of the events, the reader feels very
little; and it is this experience of alienation from the story itself that is the fundamental
experience of reading The Good Soldier.
It would seem, then, that Ford's position relative to Dowell would be one of distance and
unrestrained critique. And indeed, it is Ford's careful use of comedy to undermine Dowell's
emotional claims that detaches the reader from Dowell's narration. If, as I have claimed, The
Good Soldier is fundamentally a novel about the failure of narrative to produce an experience of
tragedy in the reader, it stands to reason that Ford—as author of this text—should firmly
dissociate himself from the fictional narrator that it is his project to critique.
Despite this, I will argue that Ford crucially—albeit provisionally—associates himself
with Dowell. Dowell, in Ford's construction, is the model of the 'Impressionist writer,' a type
1

'We speak of it to the point of nausea.'

13
proposed by Ford in the critical manifesto, “On Impressionism,” which he published shortly
prior to The Good Soldier.2 There, Ford identified himself as an Impressionist; yet a year later in
The Good Soldier, it seems to be Dowell who writes impressionistically and Ford who critiques
him. Thus in creating the separation between himself and his fictional narrator—a separation that
he uses explicitly to critique Dowell's narrative strategy and results—it seems that Ford turns
against his own vision of Impressionism.
This chapter will thus examine the relationship between Ford's theorization of
Impressionist writing and his treatment of Dowell's narration, in order to illuminate how The
Good Soldier operates as a complex and philosophically-fraught critique of Impressionist
strategy and the general possibility of modern narration. In this understanding, of course, The
Good Soldier' critique of Impressionism is the essential point of departure. It will thus be
necessary first to turn to a close consideration of “On Impressionism,” in order to examine what
elements of Impressionist narrative were of such (contradictory) importance to Ford as to
occasion his violent critique of Dowell so briefly after he had espoused the values of
Impressionist technique.
In this reading, I will argue that although Ford's stated aim in “On Impressionism” is a
simple discussion of writing technique, his understanding of Impressionism is in fact deeply
laden with anxiety over the position and possibility of modernist prose narrative. Ford argues
that Impressionist writing, through its attention to detail, is able to convey intense emotion—
particularly tragic emotion—to the reader. Yet this method is deeply problematic: in the
examples Ford actually gives in the text, Impressionist description seems to get out of control,
2

According to Martin Stannard's Norton edition of The Good Soldier, “On Impressionism” appeared across two
issues of Poetry and Drama from June to December 1914 (note to 257). The Good Soldier was first printed
under its current title in 1915, but its first half had appeared in BLAST in June 1914, titled as The Saddest Story.

14
swelling to such proportions that it threatens to overwhelm the intended emotional effect in a
surplus of literary detail. Ford is particularly attuned to the comic implications of this
supersufficient detail: at the heart of “On Impressionism,” he seems threatened by the risk of an
'Impressionist excess' that would strike its reader—against its wishes—not with tragedy but with
comedy.
I will then argue that Ford explicitly identifies Dowell as an Impressionist writer—
suggesting that Dowell's writing will also suffer from the problems that Ford has identified with
Impressionist strategy. Ford thus links Dowell to the profoundly problematic relationship to
writing—overproduction of tragic detail that results in inadvertent comedy—that he has
identified in “On Impressionism” And this problematic, I will ultimately argued, is the key to
understanding the real effect of The Good Soldier

I. Counter-reading “On Impressionism”: Rabbit-Pie and the Risk of Laughter
The summer that the first excerpts from The Good Soldier appeared in BLAST, Madox
Ford published an important theoretical text in the journal Poetry and Drama. Titled “On
Impressionism,” the piece gives a glimpse of the state of Ford's ars poetica in the summer of
1914. Ford's focus, the term 'Literary Impressionism,' had been little-used in literary contexts
despite its importance in visual art. Ford himself notes in the text that “A few years ago, if
anybody had called me an Impressionist I should languidly have denied that I was anything of
the sort or that I knew anything about the school, if there could be said to be any school” (34).
Indeed, though the word had been occasionally been applied in lower-case3, nothing had
3

Giving a brief history of the term, Ian Watt writes that when taken cross-Channel “with the foundation of the
New English Art Club in 1886 … the term was very quickly extended to ways of writing … thought to possess
the qualities popularly attributed to the painters.” But “literary use of the term remained even more casual and
descriptive; although Stephen Crane was widely categorised as an 'impressionist,' and in 1898 a reviewer of

15
appeared in contemporary writing to claim the capitalized term as a fixed school or technique.
Though the text's title would seem to propose precisely such a claim, Ford is strikingly
evasive about giving a clear definition of Impressionism. Indeed, his first sentence explicitly
suggests that he will avoid any such definition or general treatment. “These are merely some
notes towards a working guide to Impressionism as a literary method” (33), he writes; and in this
“merely” he proposes to forgo a strict definition of “Impressionism” entirely, instead discussing
it from the standpoint of practice or technique. His text will thus move “toward” impressionism
as a “working guide,” rather than beginning from literary impressionism with a philosophical
argument or artist’s manifesto.
It is thus not so much that Ford’s text has difficulty identifying the essence of
impressionist practice, but that it refuses to do so. Rather, Ford prefers to treat impressionism
with an ambiguity—and contradiction—appropriate to a technique focused on variability,
subjectivity, and the individuality proper to every description and every experience.
To potential Impressionist writers, for instance, Ford suggests that “You must state your
argument; you must illustrate it, and then you must stick in something that appears to have
nothing whatever to do with either subject or illustration, so that the reader will exclaim: 'What
the devil is the fellow driving at?'” (48). It seems that Ford intended to put this advice into
practice in “On Impressionism,” using the text's own digressions and contradictions, not to
digress, but precisely to advance its central (if hidden) contentions. Ford's manifesto of
Impressionism is thus an exemplar of the style it proposes: Ford succeeds in making his reader
ask precisely “what the devil is the fellow driving at?”
Conrad's first collection of short stories …. described him as an 'impressionistic realist,' there was little talk of
impressionism as a literary movement until considerably later” (“Impressionism and Symbolism in Heart of
Darkness, 314-15).

16
Ford's own claim about Impressionist style—that it is necessarily evasive, contradictory,
that it runs often at cross-purposes to its real intent—thus subtly and fundamentally destabilizes
the terrain from which he can establish, for instance, the philosophical non-importance of
Impressionism. If an Impressionist text that aims to convey the essence of “a long speech about
the fish” consists necessarily of observations, for instance, about “the man at the same table with
you ... talking about morals” and “a meeting with some lady,” what can assure the careful reader
of this Impressionist text that Ford's hemming and hawing on the mere role of Impressionism as
“style” and “technique” is not the cover for a different, perhaps more far-reaching understanding
of Impressionism that is advanced à l'oblique beneath the 'proper' argumentation of the text?
Thus when Ford writes:
I am not claiming any great importance for my work; I daresay it is all right. At
any rate, I am a perfectly self-conscious writer; I know exactly how I get my
effects, as far as those effects go. Then, if I am in truth an Impressionist, it must
follow that a conscientious and exact account of how I myself work will be an
account, from the inside, of how Impressionism is reached, produced, or gets its
effects. I can do no more (34),
the solidity of such an assertion has already been destabilized. Ford insists here that literary
impressionism is merely a writer's tool with no more philosophical implications; but the attentive
Fordian reader must suspect that something else is in play beneath the surface. In referring to
Impressionism as a “literary method,” Ford suggests that it is merely a tool to convey
impressions to the reader, and that it thus holds no more than an instrumental relationship to
those impressions and to the function of the text. Yet if we take Ford at his word—if we accept
that this 'conveyance of impressions' succeeds in producing emotion in the reader—does it not
seem that the whole project of emotive writing hinges on the success or failure of the
Impressionist method?

17
Let us begin, then, by considering the ways in which “On Impressionism” is not entirely
unitary—cracks which will help to open up the complex and ambiguous relationship that the text
bears to narrative practice. The most important contradiction, the one that runs through the very
center of “On Impressionism” and which carries enormous implications for The Good Soldier, is
centered on this question of detail. What Ford identifies as the essence of Impressionism is, on
the one hand, a precise and exact sparingness in description. This representational reserve was
evident, for instance, in his discussion of Hogarth's drawing in four lines; and it is the same
reserve that Ford signals as essential when he discusses Maupassant's representation of Henry
VIII. “All that de Maupassant finds it necessary to say is: 'C'était un monsieur à favoris rouges
qui entrait toujours le premier.' And that is all that I know about Henry VIII.--that he was a
gentleman with red whiskers who always went first through a door” (38). In this version of
Impressionism, then, it is the element of concision that is necessary above all else: representation
should be precise, and it should encapsulate as much of the signified as possible in a single term.
Yet, within a few pages, it seems that a good Impressionist must necessarily be verbose—
that “in order to produce an illusion you must justify; in order to justify you must introduce a
certain amount of matter,” matter that “may not appear germane to your story or to your poem”
(44). It is a necessity that the Impressionist writer write too much, that he contradict himself, that
he digress, and that above all else “the Impressionist must always exaggerate” (36). Thus stated
differently: the essential contradiction in “On Impressionism” is between the ideal of absolute
brevity and the necessity—in the practice of Impressionist writing—to furnish an immense
quantity of detail.
What Ford discusses in “On Impressionism,” then, is not only the superliminal question

18
of the text—how to produce pleasant or appropriate style—but also, far more subtly and
fundamentally, the danger of active prose style to its own effect. It is as though style depended
for its function upon an absolute brevity and transparency, yet in seeking to provide detail in ever
greater quantities in order to produce an emotional effect on the reader, suddenly got in its own
way or became tangled in its own methodology. The very core of Impressionism—the furnishing
of minute detail—contradicts with the necessity that Impressionism be brief and transparent; and
the result is that, precisely for having tried to produce an emotional effect, it trips up, is
discovered as style, and produces no resonance with the reader.
Thus at one moment Ford cites “Hogarth's drawing of the watchman with the pike over
his shoulder and dog at his heels going in at a door, the whole being executed in four lines” as
“the high-watermark of Impressionism” (36-37), arguing that it is the brevity of the depiction
that constitutes its representational force; yet a few pages later, he writes that
If to-day, at lunch at your club, you heard an irascible member making a long speech
about the fish, what you remember … is that he said that the sole was not a sole, but a
blank, blank, blank plaice; that the cook ought to be shot, by God he ought to be shot.
The plaice had been out of the water two years, and it had been caught in a drain: all that
there was of Dieppe about this Sole Dieppoise was something that you cannot
remember. You will remember this gentleman's starting eyes, his grunts between words,
that he was fond of saying 'damnnable, damnable, damnable.' You will also remember
that the man at the same table with you was talking about morals, and that your boots
were too tight, whilst you were trying, in your under mind, to arrange a meeting with
some lady. . . .” (41-42, ellipsis original).
In this second articulation, directly counter-posed to the case of Hogarth, it seems that quite a bit
of detail—even an overwhelming quantity, so much that the writer can only trail off with an
ellipsis—is necessary to convey the exact experience—the Impression—of hearing this club
member's speech. It is necessary, then, to delve into all the surrounding experiences—even if
only tenuously or contextually related—in order to convey the full, exact sense of the primary

19
impression to the reader.
The example of the Sole Dieppoise that Ford has given us here, further, is only a
miniature study of the necessity of detail to Impressionist writing. Compared to the subject of a
novel, the impression that it intends to convey is very brief—a several minute speech, next to
some months or years in the lives of a whole group of characters. How much more context would
be necessary to convey the impression of five years of life among a group of friends? How many
innumerable, minute feelings—“the man at the same table with you was talking about morals,
and ... your boots were too tight”—would have to be given to add up to the complete account of
those years?
What Ford suggests, then, is a contradiction of massive proportions that runs to the very
heart of Impressionist writing. It is necessary, on one hand, to capture an image as swiftly as
possible: it is the essence, the very core of the impression that one must convey, not its context or
extraneous detail. Yet on the other, it is precisely this extraneous information, perceived by the
individual who is attempting to convey his own experience, that makes up his perception: it is
impossible for him to separate his own experience of the club member's speech from his own
edging uncomfortability at that moment due to the wholly unrelated problem of the fit of his
boots.
Impressionism finds itself, then, in a quandary: it insists, to convey an emotion, that two
contradictory approaches must be taken; and it will necessarily find itself unable to succeed. And
the stakes of Ford's text, it must be insisted, are high: the essential functioning of artistic tragedy,
for instance, is to produce an experience of emotion in its audience; and if this conveyance of
emotional impressions is necessarily blocked, Impressionist tragedy is therefore impossible.

20

Within “On Impressionism,” however, Ford proposes a theoretical solution to this
quandary—a stylistic unification of the contradictory necessities of detail and brevity. Ford
writes that these terms will be reconciled, almost dialectically, at the moment when the mass
of detail furnished by Impressionist writing is brought into a gigantic conceptual or
emotional unity: it is when these details fuse into a single, vital Impression through the
writer's sudden revelation of their interrelationship that the problems of Impressionism are
overcome and Impressionist tragedy can function.
Describing this effect, Ford begins with the seeming unrelatedness of the details given
during the Impressionist method:
The first business of Impressionism is to produce an impression, and the only way in
literature to produce an impression is to awaken interest. And, in a sustained argument,
you can only keep interest awakened by keeping alive, by whatever means you may
have at your disposal, the surprise of your reader. You must state your argument; you
must illustrate it, and then you must stick in something that appears to have nothing
whatever to do with either subject or illustration, so that the reader will exclaim: ‘What
the devil is the fellow driving at?’ And then you must go on in the same way—arguing,
illustrating, and starting and arguing, startling and illustrating—until at the very end
your contentions will appear like a raveled skein. And then, in the last few lines, you
will draw towards you the masterstring of that seeming confusion, and the whole pattern
of the carpet, the whole design of the net-work will be apparent (48).
By the end of the passage, they have been fused, almost soteriologically, into a massive
interdependence in which each detail, once considered insignificant, is filled with meaning and
rendered vital to the totality of the whole: without the inclusion of even the most unrelated
experience in narrative—the poor fit of one's boots, for instance—the final meaning of that
narrative cannot be arrived at.
Thus at the moment that the 'masterstring' is pulled, the contradictions of the

21
Impressionist method are resolved and the project succeeds—which in the case of The Good
Soldier should mean producing in the reader an overwhelming experience of tragedy, when the
myriad, contradictory experiences of Dowell are fused into a single, overcoming impression of
“the Saddest Story.”
In “On Impressionism,” Ford gives an demonstration in miniature of function of the
Impressionist masterstring. It is a story designed to show how Impressionist writing uses detail—
detail to a degree that overwhelms conventional expectation of causality and plot development—
to show a tragic history in its full proportions and full emotional effect, by bringing that detail
into sudden, meaning-filled relation around a single all-important symbol or idea. Here is Ford's
example:
Let me again illustrate exactly what I mean. It is not sufficient to say: “Mr Jones was a
gentleman who had a strong aversion to rabbit-pie.” It is not sufficient, that is to say, if
Mr Jones's dislike for rabbit-pie is an integral part of your story. And it is quite possible
that a dislike for one form or other of food might form the integral part of a story. Mr
Jones might be a hard-worked coal-miner with a well-meaning wife, whom he disliked
because he was developing a passion for a frivolous girl. And it might be quite possible
that one evening the well-meaning wife, not knowing her husband's peculiarities, but
desiring to give him a special and extra treat, should purchase from a stall a couple of
rabbits and spend many hours in preparing for him a pie of great succulence, which
should be a solace to him when he returns, tired with his labours and rendered nervous
by his growing passion for the other lady. The rabbit-pie would then become a symbol
—a symbol of the whole tragedy of life. It would symbolize for Mr Jones the whole of
his wife's want of sympathy for him and the whole of his distaste for her; his reception
of it would symbolize for Mr Jones the whole of his wife's want of sympathy for him
and the whole of his distaste for her; his reception of it would symbolize for Mrs Jones
the whole hopelessness of her life, since she had expended upon it inventiveness,
sedulous care, sentiment, and a good will. From that position, with the rabbit-pie
always in the centre of the discussion, you might work up to the murder of Mrs Jones,
to Mr Jones's elopement with the other lady—to any tragedy that you liked. For indeed
the position contains, as you will perceive, the whole tragedy of life (44-45).
Ford—as he has told the reader, at least—has set out to show how emotion is produced in
the reader. His subject in the story of Mr Jones should be an example of tragedy: it is the story of

22
the breakdown of several human lives over love, desire, and unhappiness; and it results in the
death of at least one character. In good Impressionist form, the elements of the looming tragedy
are introduced as seemingly unrelated—even insignificant—details: we are certain, as the story
advances, that the “many hours” spent by Mr Jones' wife and the “great succulence,” even the
“solace” of the pie will have some tragic denouement. Yet this tragedy is unclear until the
moment when the diverse elements are placed in relation, a moment of sudden lucidity when
every degree of emotional loss—from Mrs Jones' loss of her husband's love to the waste of her
“many hours” in making the pie—is stacked in a simultaneous, overwhelming bacchanalia of
emotive misery.
And yet at the moment of this denouement—the moment when the story's diverse
elements are put into sudden, tragic relation around Mrs Jones' rabbit-pie—something horrifying
erupts. The rabbit-pie must represent the Impressionist confluence of several human lives' sum of
unhappiness, impatience, and sorrow; it is responsible, according to Ford, for the massive
production of sorrow in the reader. Faced with all this, the pie can only burst under the weight:
the reader at that moment in the story, faced with the representation of “the whole tragedy of
human life” in a dramatic, overwrought rabbit-pie, can only laugh.
By all accounts, the story of Mr Jones should be sad. Indeed, it should be sad in the
excessive, maudlin sense that Ford captures in repeated claim that the pie—wasting everything
from Mr Jones' love to two perfectly good rabbits— is the “whole tragedy of life.”
Yet precisely because of this, laughter bursts out. Above all, this laughter comes from the
hyperbole into which Ford's literary treatment of Mr Jones has forced the story. What is truly
laughable is not Mr Jones' situation but its narration. The overwrought expectations established

23
by Ford's claim that “The rabbit-pie would then become a symbol—a symbol of the whole
tragedy of life;” the whole tearful back-story of love and disillusion that is invested into the
symbolic rabbit-pie; and the final, saddening results of the rabbit-pie's dramatic appearance
conspire to render the authentically tragic elements of the story of Mr Jones profoundly comic at
the exact moment that they should command the reader's sympathy.
Ford's example of Impressionist writing, then, does not support the point that he has been
making—the point that Impressionism is a tool for conveying emotions. Instead it is
fundamentally disruptive to that idea: here, a story that should be tragic on its own terms has,
through the Impressionist focus on the comic 'blot' of the rabbit-pie at its center, been brought to
mere comedy. It ought by all accounts to appear truly tragic to the reader: given the breakdown
of a marriage, an affair, and a murder all in one passage, Mr Jones seems to be so overwhelmed
with plot events that he is hardly “shivering,” in Benjamin's terms, for lack of fate. Impressionist
style—it is Ford's intention—will only heighten this effect by bringing these plot events, at their
fullest and most detailed, together in a spectacularly sorrowful denouement. Yet the result of this
Impressionist treatment is that the reader is left trembling not only with shivers but with laughter:
no shred of 'fate' or 'meaning' can be gleaned from the tragedy of Mr Jones, because its narrative
has brought all its tragic sense to mere laughability.
Thus is it not, in the end, Impressionist writing itself that is responsible for this fatal
back-firing of tragedy in the story of Mr Jones? It seems that something in the functioning of
Ford's Impressionist masterstring is profoundly broken. The string exists, to be sure: it does its
work in bringing these diverse experiences into a simultaneous, totalizing relationship. Yet the
impression it produces in doing so is ultimately anything but tragic.

24
This, then, is how the 'Impressionist anxiety' over brevity and detail has ultimately played
out. Ford has attempted to resolve the contradiction—indeed, he has done so successfully—but
at the moment that Impressionism forces its grand resources of detail into tragic meaning, its
attempt has become so literary, so overwrought, so un-Impressionistic that only laughter results.
Has Impressionism ultimately failed? That, it seems, may be the only conclusion to be taken
from a careful reading of “On Impressionism;” and as will be seen in the argument that The
Good Soldier represents a profound critique of Dowell's version of an Impressionist text, it was
Ford's final decision as well.
What will be discussed next, then, is the relationship between The Good Soldier and
Ford's highly problematic vision of Impressionism. The Good Soldier, I will claim, deals with the
problems of Impressionism at its very heart: it is my contention that Dowell's narration of The
Good Soldier is the quintessential Impressionist text, and that Dowell is the quintessential
Impressionist.

II. Dowell as Literary Impressionist: “On Impressionism” and The Good Soldier
What is the relationship, then, between “On Impressionism” and The Good Soldier? The
wager I will make in this section is that for Ford, Dowell's narration was a model of
Impressionist writing. There is, I will argue, firm evidence for consideration of Dowell as an
Impressionist because of explicit borrowings in his writing from passages in “On
Impressionism.” What this means, then, is that The Good Soldier represents an attempt to fully
work out the contradictions and profound anxieties that Ford had developed in “On
Impressionism.” Dowell's narration is a case study of Impressionist writing and its ultimate

25
success or failure in producing an emotional resonance in its reader; and The Good Soldier thus
represents “On Impressionism” put into practice for the real stakes of tragedy or comedy.
Under consideration, then, will be Dowell's strategy of narration and its parallels to Ford's
theoretical articulation of Impressionism. Dowell is under consideration here as a 'narrator,' but
in order to fully appreciate his relationship to Ford, he must also be termed a 'writer' or 'author.'
That is to say, Dowell is not a mere scribbler: Ford is careful to portray his work as thoughtful,
researched, and above all, considerate of style. It is important to note that Dowell is a craftsman,
because Ford's ultimate movement in The Good Soldier—a critique of the failure of Dowell's
“Saddest Story” to produce anything more than laughter in its reader—would be nearly
meaningless if Dowell were simply a portrait of a poor or careless writer. Instead, Dowell's
writing is consciously literary: he is aware, I will argue, not only of where he intends to represent
the story in a high-feudal tone or a tragic one, but also of his own relationship to humor.
It is vital to this argument, of course, that Dowell is no accidental Impressionist. His
whole purpose, instead, is to convey a very particular experience—his position in the events that
occurred between the Ashburnhams and the Dowells—to the reader. Further, he does so through
a narrative that meets all the major conditions of Impressionist writing: it is—as Dowell is aware
—digressive and associative rather than linear and historical; personal and emotionally-fraught
rather than rational and objective; addressed to a sympathetic or emotionally resonant reader
rather than a general, abstract one; and most importantly, focused on the complex relationship
between highly diverse, even fragmentary events and experiences as the record of human
experience that constitutes an 'Impression.'
In only a handful of passages of The Good Soldier does Dowell offer explicit discussion

26
of his methodology; and so it is striking that in two of these, Ford explicitly repeats syntactic
choices—now in Dowell's voice—from his own manifesto of Impressionism. Thus in“On
Impressionism” we have Ford's statement that the writer “must typify for himself a human soul
in sympathy with his own” (48), a sentence whose central noun and adjective reappear directly,
merely inverted, in Dowell's description of his self-imagination “for a fortnight or so at one side
of the fireplace of a country cottage, with a sympathetic soul opposite me” (15). Ford's claim in
“On Impressionism” is that the beliefs, aesthetics, emotional resonances—in a word, the
sentimentality—shared with the reader are what allow the artist to convey his impressions; and
thus for this same reason, Dowell writes that he will address only a sympathetic audience:
From time to time we shall get up and go to the door and look out at the great moon and
say: “Why it is nearly as bright as in Provence!” And then we shall come back to the
fireside, with just the touch of a sigh because we are not in the Provence where even the
saddest stories are gay (The Good Soldier, 15).
Here, Dowell has not only borrowed an idea directly from Ford's model of Impressionist writing,
but even shared the content of Ford's sentimentality as well.4 Ford thus captured what was
sentimental in his own writing—a love of Provence—and inflated it to grotesque proportions in
Dowell's. Writing, if it will not hold its own weight, must be accompanied by “the touch of a
sigh”—a conceit that is no less Fordian than Dowellian.
Two pages later in another of Dowell's self-critical passages, another textual moment of
“On Impressionism” is explicitly reproduced. Ford writes in “On Impressionism” that the
“human soul in sympathy … [is] a silent listener” (48); but in The Good Soldier he gives that line
to Dowell, who writes that “you, the listener, sit opposite me. But you are so silent. You don't tell
me anything” (17). Ford's fascination with a silent and charitable reader—the one he imagines at
4

As will be discussed in the next chapter, Ford had a lifelong appreciation—as well as some expertise—in
Provence, chivalry, and Troubadour poetry.

27
his most maudlin moments—is here transferred to Dowell, and Ford gives particular emphasis to
the choice by citing his own critical language in Dowell's articulation.
It has been shown, then, that Ford repeats imagery and syntax from “On Impressionism”
quite vividly in Dowell's writing; and it seems that there is an excellent reason those repetitions
appear in one of Dowell's consciously self-critical passages. Ford is not immune in The Good
Soldier to the temptation of direct editorialization: as will be discussed later, his own artistic taste
and influences are recognizable in Dowell's fascination with Provence and Troubadorial writing.
In his notes to the text, Martin Stannard even notes a passage from The Good Soldier that Ford
would later copy as a dedication of the book—more than likely a good sign that he found himself
in comfortable agreement with Dowell's voice there (note to 80). In much of the minor area of
The Good Soldier, then, Ford's relationship with Dowell is less clearly differentiated; but here, in
Dowell's first discussion of his position as a writer and his own artistic theory, it would seem
impossible that Ford should be unaware of the significance of formulating his narrator's method
of writing in explicitly the same terms as his own. And indeed it is not unconscious: what is
under discussion in The Good Soldier through Dowell's writing style is Impressionism itself; and
in the success or failure of Dowell's project of writing Ford gives his judgment of the possibility
of all Impressionist writing.
In addition to the parallels between “On Impressionism” and Dowell's own imbedded
literary manifestos, The Good Soldier is structurally an Impressionist text. It advances through
Dowell's reminiscences, at times taking up with the plot's chronology, moving associatively
across it at others. Dowell himself is fascinated with the fragmentation and narrative alinearity of
his own account: he asks, for instance, “Is all this digression or isn’t it digression? Again I don’t

28
know” (17). Later we have:
I have been casting back again; but I cannot help it. It is so difficult to keep all these
people going. I tell you about Leonora and bring her up to date; then about Edward
who has fallen behind. And then the girl gets hopelessly left behind. I wish I could put
it down in diary form (142).
Dowell's reference to a diary is particularly illuminating: what could be more deeply
Impressionist, in Ford's definition, than a text composed purely of personal memories and
directly back toward the writer himself?
Dowell also follows Ford's injunction that the Impressionist writer be ambiguous, everchanging, and even contradictory. Dowell's account is a text filled with contradiction: it is hardly
an attempt at an objective history, more closely approximating a history of Dowell's own
changing position and interpretation in the course of writing. He writes early on, for instance,
that “I want to do Leonora every justice. I love her very dearly for one thing” (The Good Soldier,
43), but later describes her as cold and sadistic, writing that
Yes, Leonora wished to bring her riding whip down on Nancy’s young face. She
imagined the pleasure she would feel when the lash fell across those queer features; the
pleasure she would feel at drawing the handle at the same moment toward her so as to
cut deep into the flesh and to leave a lasting weal (135).
Dowell's narration, then, is precisely the product of an application of Ford's articulation of
Literary Impressionism to a novel-length work. By massively recounting seemingly looselylinked information, its project is to produce in the reader—when the master-connection of this
account is suddenly made evident at the moment of denouement—precisely the emotional
experience that its narrator has undergone.
What is suddenly threatened in Dowell's manuscript, then, is the effectiveness of that
denouement. Dowell has given the reader an account of the tragic downfall of two couples and

29
the characters around them, with tragic results just as serious as those in the story of Mr Jones.
Yet when this tragedy is made clear—when the meaning of the diverse recollections Dowell has
given is suddenly pieced together by the reader—is the effect produced truly that of “the Saddest
Story?” Or is it not that, just as the Impressionist masterstring brought about a perversely comic
denouement in the story of Mr Jones, the moment at which Dowell's many recollections are
worked into a plot results only in the comic detachment of the reader instead of the immense
sadness that Dowell expects to produce?

This chapter set out to identify the stakes of Dowell's literary style in The Good Soldier,
by considering Dowell's relationship to Ford's complex critical term “Impressionism.” Ford
himself claims that his criticism is more technical advice for aspiring writers than a highly
theoretical or literary endeavor. I have argued, however, this attitude on Ford's part masks a
sophisticated discussion of prose style, the viability of aesthetic and artifice, and the risk of
inadvertent comedy in modern 'serious' literature. Much of this is packed into Ford's usage of the
term Impressionist, which Ford invests with such contradiction and ambiguity that the word itself
stands more as an obstacle to the text than as a point of entry.
I have attempted precisely to unpack Ford's idea of Impressionism precisely by moving
through these points of contradiction. Ford equivocates most of all on the question of concision
versus detail in Impressionist representation. Thus at one moment, he insists on the necessity of
absolute brevity in Impressionist work, due to what seems a lurking visceral horror of excessive
description.
Yet at the same time, Impressionism demands an overwhelming degree of detail.

30
Impressions and their communicability seem to overrun the reader: in order to describe a man's
reaction to a piece of fish, it it necessary for Ford to give an account of each of the man's
rhetorical habits, to digress into his own immense boredom as his thoughts move elsewhere.
Ford ultimately attempts to reconcile these divergent tendencies in the idea of the
'masterstring,' a concept that I argue is played out in miniature in his example of Mr Jones and
the rabbit-pie. There, it seems that Ford's integration of detail and concision into a single 'masterimpression' succeeds: the rabbit-pie of the story serves to bring together all the diverse tragic
elements into a single practical and symbolic object. Thus this object, the rabbit-pie itself, is
laden with enormous narrative importance: it is, in Ford's scheme, the crux of the mechanism
through which the single, overwhelming impression of Mr Jones' story will be conveyed to the
reader.
It is precisely here, however, that the subterranean anxieties of “On Impressionism”
emerge. The rabbit-pie—intentionally imagined as a mundane instantiation of enormously larger
tragic elements—is comically out of proportion to the role it should play, and thus the reaction it
suggests to the reader is laughter—crucially, laughter in spite of the reader's awareness of the
story's tragic elements.
What “On Impressionism” poses at its most essential, then, is the threat that
Impressionism—the attempt to convey the human sense of a perception, action, story—could be
undone by itself: the profound and effective expression of human experience serves, as in the
case of Mr Jones and his rabbit-pie, only to produce a sadness so maudlin and so
disproportionate—what should be “the whole tragedy of life” is represented by a rabbit-pie—
that, in a kind of nausea, it results only in comedy. In the attempt to invest a history with human

31
meaning, then, there is an uncontrollable overproduction in language that threatens the
seriousness of the original: it is as though narrative turned upon itself in Impressionism and was
unable to read its own product without lapsing into the comic.
What, then, is the relationship between “On Impressionism” and The Good Soldier? As
delineated in the chapter, Dowell comes to take on many of the characteristics of Ford's model
Impressionist. He does not give a ordered, 'logical' narrative, but instead retells his own emotions
as they come to him; he does not address himself to a general audience but to an intimate,
sympathetic one; he does not attempt to present a narrative free from subjective influence, but
gives the most personally-inflected, emotion-laden account possible.
Indeed, Dowell's imagination of his narrative is, after all, as “The Saddest Story;” and his
role as narrator is this to emphasize this sadness to the breaking point. Yet as we will see,
Dowell's impression of sadness ultimately hinges on another faulty Impressionist master-string:
at the moment he will reach the tragic conclusion of the text, it will have fallen prey to precisely
the problems posed by Ford in “On Impressionism.” Laughter bursts out: the text is so
overwhelmed by its pretensions to tragedy, to heroism, to romance that it collapses into laughter.
And yet it is for Ford no cheap comedy. Though Ford's Impressionism appears,
ultimately, to result in a sudden and even inadvertent comedy, it must be remembered that in its
intentions, at least, Impressionism was to be a literature of tragic sensibility, of melodrama, of
hyperbole. And of all of these things, Ford was, to be sure, enamored: “On Impressionism” and
even The Good Soldier must be seen, despite Ford's refusal to hide their comic disjunctions, as at
least a real attempt toward the tragic. “On Impressionism” has shown that, given the implications
of Ford's critical writing, this attempt had already become untenable. And thus as this reading

32
continues, The Good Soldier will show the results of Dowell's full-fledged application of that
untenable approach. It is in the novel that Ford leads Impressionism to its natural conclusions;
and as “On Impressionism” has foreshadowed, they will not perform what Dowell hopes.

33

Chapter II
'Les faiz, gestes, triumphes et prouesses du Bon Chevalier'5:
Ashburnham, Dowell, and the Feudal

Une grande révolution démocratique s'opère parmi
nous ; tous la voient, mais tous ne la jugent point de
la même manière.6
Alexis de Tocqueville, De la démocratie en Amérique
The Good Soldier has been read, it is fair to say, as a modern novel. That is, Ford's major
points of reference have been considered, for instance, Flaubert, Henry James, Joseph Conrad. I
do not intend to criticize this approach: to do so would be absurd, given the importance of
Conrad and his collaboration with Ford to the development of Ford's style. Nevertheless I will
note that to locate Ford's work by these points of reference necessarily results in a very particular
path of reading. Thus criticism that has taken this essential assumption has focused heavily on
novelistic technique, and on complex character development and character 'psychology.'
Let us consider, for a moment, a novel hypothesis. If one considers The Good Soldier in
another field of references—an associative network centered on the term 'feudal' and the
importance of 'good soldiery' to Ford's novelistic project—a radically different text might
emerge. It would suggest, for instance, Edward's failure to fulfill the conventional expectations

5
6

'The deeds, the acts, and the triumphs of the Good Knight.'
'A great democratic revolution is in operation among us; we all see it, but we do not all judge it in the same
manner.'

34
of the figure of 'The Good Soldier,' rather than the psychological depth of his character.
To propose such a radically new associative field for The Good Soldier is, on the face of
it, bold. Nevertheless, Ford's own historical position was such that his participation in a certain
movement towards the aesthetic revitalization of the feudal was nearly mandated. Contextually,
Ford is positioned perfectly: he had an early proximity to the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood
through his grandfather Ford Madox Brown (whose name he later took);7 and his artistic career
intersects importantly with Ezra Pound's at the time Pound was working on his own feudal
reinvention, the Provencal translations. Though I will continue on to argue that a renaissance of
feudal associations or aesthetics is central to the early modernist artistic climate around Ford
(importantly touching on the Futurist and Vorticist movements), it is enough here to note the
importance of this influence on Ford and on the depth of the medievalist background that he
possessed. His father, Francis Hueffer, was a noted scholar of Provencal and of Troubadour
poetry; Ford's fascination with Provence was sufficiently significant for him to later develop his
own theory of feudal virtue in A Mirror to France—and to buy a house in the region.
Thus there is, given a casual survey, more than enough evidence to pursue a reading of
these 'feudal associations' found echoing in The Good Soldier. Such a reading will, I am
confident, profoundly inform a reading of the novel: the text's relationship to several key
associative terms (first and foremost, 'Soldiery' and what it means to be a 'Good Soldier') is
fundamental to its operation and 'sense.' In particular, the novel's failure to arrive at a satisfactory
representation or re-presentation of these terms is central to the comic nature of the text, and to
an understanding of the importance of that comedy.
7

As its name itself emphasizes, the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood was interested in pre-Renaissance artistic
methods and subjects. While their interest was less in the concept of 'soldiery' so important to Ford's novel, their
high estimation of medieval art and culture arguably had enormous influence not only on Ford's education and
work but on the whole fascination with 'modern feudalism' high modernist discourse.

35

I
As a point of entry, I will give particular weight to a consideration of the intertextual
relationship between The Good Soldier and a historical text, the 1527 Histoire des faiz, gestes,
triumphes et prouesses du Bon Chevalier sans paour et sans reprouche. The text is a history of
the life of Pierre Terrail, Lord of Bayard (1473-1524), perhaps the most famous exemplar of
feudal chivalry. Believed to have been written by Bayard's archer and secretary, Jacques de
Mailles, the text consistently refers to Bayard with the formula 'le Bon Chevalier' (e.g. “Chapitre
I. Comment le seigneur de Bayart, pere du bon Chevalier sans paour et sans reprouche, eut
vouloir de sçavoir de ses enfans de quel estat ilz vouloient estre” (147))8 De Mailles' depiction of
Bayard can thus be taken, in a sense, as de Mailles' account of what it is to be a 'Good Soldier' or
'Bon Chevalier.'
Historically, De Mailles' formula for 'le Bon Chevalier' has gained considerable weight:
the story of Bayard, of which de Mailles' text is the closest original source, has been enormously
important in the post-medieval mythologization of chivalric conduct. Thus de Mailles' account is
highly representative, if not definitional, to the post-medieval understanding of what it is to be a
'Good Soldier:' l'Histoire du Bon Chevalier is the exemplar of a historico-literary discourse on
chivalric conduct that has defined the 'faiz et gestes' of feudal protagonists.
Ford was absolutely aware—as would anyone of his era—of the history of Bayard.9
8

9

'Chapter I: How the father of the good Knight without fear or reproach wanted to know from his children of
which estate they wanted be.'
It is difficult to appreciate, given his near-disappearance from common discourse in the century since Ford, the
'pop-culture' standing of Bayard in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Bayard was known to the
reading public through translations into modern French and English, such as those brought out by Hachette in
1882, by Chapman & Hall in London in 1883, and by James Pott in New York in 1900. Notably, the latter means
that Bayard editions were available not only to well-read, multilingual, Francophile Ford, but to his slightly less
knowledgeable—and American—fictional narrator John Dowell. There was even a genre of illustrated accounts

36
Indeed, it is mentioned explicitly in The Good Soldier: Dowell writes that Leonora, speaking of
Edward, “made him out like a cross between Lohengrin and the Chevalier Bayard” (68).10 That
Ford had first-hand access to de Mailles' account is extremely likely—the 1527 edition had been
reprinted in Paris in 1837, and an edition in modern French had been brought out by Hachette in
1882. Indeed, the household-celebrity status of Bayard was such that Samuel Shellabarger, the
author of a highly enthusiastic history of Bayard published in 1928, could without irony open his
text with the lines: “Among famous men, there is none who occupies a more distinct and
enviable place than Pierre Terrail, Seigneur de Bayard … He has become a household name for
half the world” (3).
It should be noted that de Mailles was not the only contemporary chronicler of Terrail11,
and the use of the epithet “le Bon Chevalier” to describe Terrail was not limited to his text. Thus
in any case Ford would appear to have taken his novel's title from the history of Terrail—whether
directly from de Mailles, from another source, or from the story in common circulation. This
origin of the title is of enormous significance: its provenance situates Edward, not as 'the good
Victorian officer,' or as 'the good modern military commander,' but in a specifically chivalric
tradition—importantly, one that commands a certain code of conduct not limited to military
action. That is to say: 'The Good Soldier' refers in this context not only to a facility with arms,
but to a complete way of life.

10

11

of his “deeds and feats” intended for children, such as 1890's The Age of Chivalry: Scenes from the lives of the
Chevalier Bayard and Sir Philip Sidney (London, Marcus Ward & Co.). All together, this means that Ford
situated Dowell's own references to Bayard less as sophisticated or erudite allusions than as a fairly shallow,
even romanticized consciousness of the feudal.
Ford passes over this reference as lightly as possible—it is clear that excessive discussion would be extremely
heavy-handed. As it is, Dowell's passing reference to Bayard seems entirely 'in-character,' given the familiarity of
Bayard as a point of reference, and the faint sense of childishness with which Dowell experiences Europe.
Bayard's other major contemporary chronicler, Symphorien Champier, published a text titled Les Gestes,
ensemble la vie du preulx chevalier Bayard in Lyon in 1525. De Mailles' account thus places greater weight on
the 'Bon Chevalier' formula than Champier's. According to Shellabarger, De Mailles is also believed to have been
a much closer source to Bayard himself, and has historically been read more often than Champier.

37
To begin an intertextual reading, then, it will first be necessarily to establish what de
Mailles defines as a 'Good Soldier.' First, there is the social position of the Good Soldier. De
Mailles writes that
en iceulx trois estatz s'est si vertueusement gouverné, qu'il en aura quant à Dieu sa
grace, et quant au monde verdoyante et immortelle couronne de laurier, pour ce que,
touchant l'Eglise, ne s'en est jamais trouvé ung plus obeissant ; quant à l'estat de
noblesse, ung plus deffensible ; et à l'estat de labour, ung plus piteux ne secourable
(146).12
For de Mailles, Bayard's success is thus fairly strictly delimited: he will have 'grace from God'
and 'a crown of laurels from the world.' The criteria for such a success are also rigidly defined: it
is not for having been 'Good' in generalized terms but for having met his obligations to the 'three
estates' that he will have these rewards. Bayard has been obedient to the Church, protective to the
nobility, and charitable to the poor.
For de Mailles, it would thus be impossible to fulfill the role of soldiery without the
context of this society and its order; and Bayard's 'faiz et gestes' are essentially formulaic. De
Mailles continues:
Car, pour au vray amplifier les perfections d'ung homme, ne l'ay peu faire autrement,
consideré que sans grace infuse du Sainct-esperit, depuis l'incarnation de nostre sauveur
et redempteur Jesuchrist, ne s'est trouvé, en cronicque ou hystoire, prince, gentil homme,
ne autre condition qu'il ait esté, qui plus furieusement entre les cruelz, plus doucement
entre les humbles, ne plus humainement entre les petis, ait vescu, que le bon chevalier
dont la presente hystoire est commencée (145-146)'13.
The most important consideration is thus Bayard's position relative to the contemporary social

12

13

'In these three social estates he was so virtuously self-governed that for it he shall have from God his grace, and
from the world a verdant and immortal crown of laurels; for to the Church, there has never been found one more
obedient; to the estate of nobility, a greater defender; and to the estate of laborers, one more pitying nor helpful.'
'For to truly amplify the perfections of a man, I could not have done it otherwise, considering that without the
grace infused by the Holy Spirit, since the incarnation of our Saviour and Redeemer Jesus Christ there has not
been found, in chronicle or history, a prince, nobleman, or other man of any other social state, who so furiously
among the cruel, softly among the humble, nor more kindly among the small, might have lived, than the Good
Soldier of whom this history is begun.'

38
order. De Mailles also focuses consistently on Bayard's willingness to risk himself (the 'freedom
from fear' mentioned in the title), his charity to the working class, and the refinement of his
manners, conduct, and speech.
Finally, De Mailles' account does not neglect conventions of romantic love:
ll fault sçavoir que quant le bon Chevalier fut donné paige au duc Charles de Savoye,
ceste dame de Fluxas estoit jeune damoyselle en la maison avecques sa femme; et ainsi,
comme jeunes gens frequentent voulentiers ensemble, se prisrent en amour l'ung l'autre,
voire si grande, gardant toute honnesteté, que s'ilz eussent esté en leur simple vouloir,
ayant peu de regard à ce qui s'en feust peu ensuyvre, se feussent pris par nom de
mariage (203).14
His account insists most of all on the dedication of Bayard to the lady of Fluxas and the
singularity of their romance. There is, in de Mailles' telling, no possible repetition of the
experience, because it is absolutely singular—an idea that will be in sharp contrast to the
replicability and indeed replaceability that is the central theme of Ashburnham's affairs.
The importance of de Mailles' to a reading of The Good Soldier is that Bayard represents
a successful instantiation—and, in the context of Ford's time, even the exemplary case—of
chivalric ideals. De Mailles' telling of the history of Bayard works to unify these ideals in in a
single figure, fusing them through the constant, epithetic repetition of the phrase 'le Bon
Chevalier.' Thus l'Histoire de Bayard represents a distillation of chivalric tradition: Shellabarger
writes that “above all, it is unified by a definite conception of its hero expressed at the outset and
maintained unvaried. It is the romantic and chivalric conception” (4). De Mailles' account of
Bayard is thus a personification of chivalric virtue: de Mailles' 'Good Soldier' is to an extent a
historical treatment of Bayard the individual, but primarily and enduringly, it is a poesis of
14

'You must know that when the good Knight was given as a page to Duke Charles of Savoy, this lady of Fluxas
was was a young lady in the household of Charles' wife; and thus, as young people together often gladly do, they
fell in love the one with the other, so much so that in all honesty, if they had been a matter only of their volition
and with no regard for what could have resulted, they would have taken each other in marriage.'

39
chivalric life that fuses the conceits of feudal value in a single epithet, 'le Bon Chevalier.'
My suggestion in this chapter, then, is that de Mailles' text represents a treatment in
considerable specificity of the attributes I have given under the general term 'feudal.' In this role
it will serve to illuminate a reading The Good Soldier: when Ford brings de Mailles' text into
play through the allusion in the title of his novel, the stakes of good soldiery—grace from God
and a crown of laurels from the world—are put into question as well. What Ford's novel asks, in
its relationship to de Mailles' account of soldiery, is the possibility of such a history in the
modern world: is it not outdated, cliché, impossible to be a Good Soldier in 1914?
It would be wrong, however, to suggest that this consciousness of modernity as a threat to
the possibility of soldiery is brought into play by Ford, for de Mailles is already conscious of it.
Indeed, what marks de Mailles' Bayard as an exemplary pendant to The Good Soldier is the air of
outdatedness that hangs over chivalric conceit, not only in 1914 but already in 1527.
Shellabarger writes that “to the Loyal Servant, Bayard represented a tradition fast becoming
obsolete—that of chivalry with its romantic and religious connotations. He thinks of him in the
heroic terms of knightly prowess and old legend” (10).
What ultimately succeeds in de Mailles' treatment of Bayard is a literary negotiation of
this outdatedness that avoids cliché, pathos, or bad taste. Put more strongly, de Mailles' work
succeeds at operating a certain literary or poetic transcendence of its historical moment. As
Shellabarger writes: “The result [of de Mailles' work], however, is convincing. No foolish
rhetoric, no archaic tinsel mars the treatment. De Mailles's romance is not superficially romantic
… he portrays the past transfused into the present” (11). This is the kernel of de Mailles' text: it
is a successful literary objectification of the figure of the Good Soldier.

40
In presenting this other Good Soldier, Edward Ashburnham, Ford insists precisely on the
failure of Dowell's poetic representation. In giving a chronicle of the life and death of Edward,
Dowell attempts to do de Mailles' work. Like Bayard for le Loyal Serviteur, Edward represents,
at least to a certain extent, a chivalric ideal for Dowell. Nevertheless Dowell's choices in literary
representation fall flat: he is unable to create a text with the same aesthetic effect as de Mailles'.
In each case, it seems, Ford juxtaposes Ashburnham to Bayard, with Ashburnham falling
always just slightly short. Where Bayard is a seasoned soldier, Ashburnham has retired young
with heart trouble, and it seems that the extent of his heroism was being “twice recommended for
the V.C. whatever that might mean,” in recognition of his having “twice jumped off the deck of a
troopship to rescue what the girl called “Tommies” who had fallen overboard in the Red Sea and
such places” (68). Where Bayard is concerned with the physical practice of soldiery,
Ashburnham is concerned with its appearances. “The sort of thing he thought about [was] …
where you got the best soap, the best brandy,” Dowell writes, giving a particularly memorable
description to “the profusion of his cases, all of pigskin and stamped with his initials E. F. A.
There were guncases, and collar cases, and shirt cases, and letter cases and cases each containing
four bottles of medicine; and hat cases and helmet cases. It must have needed a whole herd of the
Gadarene swine to make up his outfit” (24-5).
As to romance, Bayard is dedicated—chastely—to a single mistress, while Ashburnham
is dedicated carnally to quite a few. In charity, de Mailles has Bayard giving his last coins to help
those poorer than himself; meanwhile, though Ashburnham does remit the rent of his struggling
tenants and earnestly believes in “the feudal theory of a lord doing his best by his dependents”
(98), his actions are swiftly undone in practice by Leonora, ever concerned with the manor's

41
financial stability as a result of Edward's excesses, in her quest to wring every dime out of the
couples' resources.
But what is really vital here is not the difference between Bayard and Ashburnham—after
all, one is fictional, and the other only known though mythicizing accounts. Instead, it is the
differences in literary representation that is key. De Mailles is able to portray Bayard successfully
as the Good Soldier; Dowell, on the other hand, incessantly lapses in his attempt, pointing out
instead Edward's shortcomings against chivalric ideals of soldiery and romance.
The gap between our first and second Histoires du Bon Chevalier, then, is not in their
subjects so much as their literary operation. In Dowell's telling of the Good Soldier story, there
insistently appears something of extremely poor taste—a consistent (and intentional) failure on
Ford's part to fully merge the feudal pretensions of the text with its practice. What de Mailles
successfully manages in his text is not attempted, but not quite achieved, by Dowell: his
treatment means to represent Edward in a chivalric light, but slips again and again into a
representation that suggests more of the comic than of the heroic.
Of course, this failure is already exemplified in the ironic epithet “The Good Soldier.”
Even for a reader unaware of de Mailles' text, Ford's title contains a sufficient poetic weight,
independent of the Bayard story, to constitute an aesthetic standard against which Edward's
character can be said to fail. Thus the 'fundamental joke' of the text is that Edward is no Good
Soldier at all: Ford's novel is the account—in this reading—of a merely comic failure at chivalric
representation.
What is lost in such a reading, however, is the complexity in Ford's treatment of Dowell's
representation of Edward. Without a consideration of Dowell's role in the text and the parallels

42
he shares with writers like de Mailles, Edward would be a mere 'silly' comic figure—his
juxtaposition against an ideal of soldiery would be Ford's mere ironization of Edwardian-era
British officership, and not Ford's consideration of the problems of authorship in that context.
Instead, in treating The Good Soldier as a modern mise-en-question of the possibility of
good soldiery, what must be emphasized is the determinative importance of literary mediation.
This criticism is not a consideration of the 'real merits' of Bayard and Edward—instead it is
simply a consideration of the literary treatment of the two. De Mailles, as we have already
recognized, takes a vital role in converting the lived experience of Bayard into l'Histoire de
Bayard, in changing un bon chevalier into le bon Chevalier. In essence it is the work of de
Mailles qua poet that gives Bayard this value. Ford—showing an attentiveness to the structure of
de Mailles' work—sets up The Good Soldier in parallel. Dowell is the 'loyal serviteur' of the
novel: it is his role to set down the history of Edward; and such a role gives him enormous
importance in determining its tone. In a word: the success or failure of Edward's life considered
as a text of good soldiery is dependent on Dowell's treatment of it.
To a great extent, then, this is a consideration of Dowell as a modern author of chivalry. Is
it possible, in 1914, to put lived experience through a poetic transformation that will render it, in
Shellabarger's terms, “a household name to half the world?” Or is Dowell's attempt at such a
poesis closer, in the end, to a tawdry 'poetification'—an attempt to see in Edward the legacy of a
chivalric past that has been firmly eliminated?
Thus to consider The Good Soldier as a simple 'comedy of Edward' is to miss the
seriousness with which it takes the idea of 'The Good Soldier.' The failure of Dowell's
representation is not solely 'amusing' or 'pleasant:' it depends, as already said, on a certain galling

43
poor taste at the heart of Dowell's poetics. To read this as merely comic—or as amusingly comic
—demands a certain deafness to what Ford signs as 'disgusting' or 'grotesque' in Dowell's
inability to represent Edward as a Good Soldier. Dowell makes an attempt to do so—indeed, he
almost succeeds—and thus it is all the more repulsive, to use a Fordian term, when ugliness
irrupts through this depiction of Edward. Dowell's willing aesthetic blindness in hoping to see a
roman in a life-story utterly devoid of romance thus provokes a certain 'horror of depiction:' to
the reader of romans it suggests the possibility of a gap, at once both slight and absolute,
between life and its representation.
It is this essential seriousness of the text, then, which is dependent on a co-reading with
de Mailles' history of Bayard. It is necessary to be conscious of how Ford treats and critiques
romantic depiction in order to understand the real force of The Good Soldier: it is not a novel on
Edward's life so much as it is novel on the depiction of Edward's life; and that perspective is
brought in by an awareness of chivalric context.
What remains to be delved into, then, is the complexity of Dowell's poetic failure vis-àvis de Mailles' text. It has been suggested that Dowell succeeds, at least partly, in representing
Edward in chivalric terms; and that despite or through—truly in the center of—this partial
success, an embarrassing or grotesque inadequacy bursts out in Dowell's representation. In
focusing on a comparison of de Mailles and Dowell, however, one major figure has gone
ignored: Ford himself.
What is Ford's relationship to Dowell's failure at poetic representation? If Ford is critiquing
Dowell's strategy of authorship, what does that mean, given the complex entanglement of
authorial techniques shown between Ford and his fictional writer?

44
II
Though The Good Soldier is, I have claimed, ultimately profoundly critical of Dowell's
narrative technique, Ford is nevertheless inextricably entangled with Dowell: as discussed in the
opening chapter, Ford's portrait of Dowell espouses a version of the same ideas of literary
Impressionism that Ford laid out in his own critical manifesto. This entanglement was not
accidental—on the contrary it is what gives Ford's critique of Dowell's narrative its force. Ford is
not merely an ironist of Dowell's failure; instead, his treatment of Dowell's project carries serious
weight for his own understanding of the possibility of modern tragic narrative.
Ford's ligature with Dowell, however, is not wholly on the level of literary technique. As
briefly suggested in the opening to this chapter, Ford had a lengthy and profound attachment to
French and German history. To his literary work, then, he brought a personal attachment to the
medieval—demonstrated in his penchant for writing unabashedly historico-positive texts like
The Fifth Queen (date) and The Cinque Ports (1900), which Ford describes in its dedication as “a
piece of literature pure and simple, an attempt, by means of suggestion, to interpret to the passing
years the inner message of the Five Ports” (v-vi). The Good Soldier is contemporary and not
historical, but if the novel indeed sets itself in strong parallelism to l'Histoire de Bayard, it must
be understood as a treatment of historical ideals. Were Ford writing in an extension of the spirit
he suggested in the dedication of The Cinque Ports—that is, if he intended The Good Soldier as a
simple translation of historical ideals into the modern era—we could expect The Good Soldier to
consist indeed of straightforward praise for the historical, and of an attempt to successfully
depict at Edward as embodying the 'modern equivalent' of Bayard.
This, of course, is not the case. Edward's failure to represent such an equivalent has been

45
clearly understood by critics of The Good Soldier, so much so that Edward's 'foolishness' has
become perhaps too axiomatic in readings of the novel. But does the failure of Dowell's attempt
to render Edward as 'The Good Soldier' mean that Ford was fundamentally unsympathetic to
such a rendering?
Such a conclusion does not necessarily follow. It can be considered clear that Dowell's
representation of Edward as 'The Good Soldier' fails while still considering the complexity and
nuance of that failure. Dowell continues to hold Edward in considerable esteem even when his
literary representation as the 'Good Soldier' does not succeed; and given Ford's complex
attachment to Dowell, the novel's depiction of Edward, though fundamentally negative, cannot
therefore be considered an abandonment on Ford's part of any possible sympathy for his 'Good
Soldier' hero, or an abandonment of his love for the feudal.
Thus far from clear disavowal, Ford's relationship to Edward as 'chivalric hero' and to
Dowell as 'poet of the chivalric' remains enormously complex. This is, after all, the same Ford
that would write A Mirror to France (1925), a text in which, according to Arthur Mizener, “Ford
begins to transform his early Pre-Raphaelite feelings about Provence into the theory that
'chivalric generosity, frugality, pure thought and the arts are the first requisites of a Civilization'”
(348; citation quoted in Mizener from A Mirror to France, 14). And it is also the same Ford who
would, rather suddenly, enlist as a British officer in the First World War.15 Does this evidence
support the claim that The Good Soldier absolutely disowned modernist idealization of the
feudal, or that it represented Ford's absolute refusal to believe or ever participate in ideas of
modern heroic warfare?
Instead, it seems, Ford remains significantly associated with Dowell, particularly
15

Image 1: “'The Good Soldier,' ca. 1915” (Mizener, 456).

46

because of their common role as writers of modernist feudal narrative. It is thus historically
entirely well-founded to suggest that the romantic ideas (authorship, soldiery) that Ford so
forcibly critiques in The Good Soldier were the same ideas that he himself held—even those with

47
which he defined his own life—and that The Good Soldier is not merely detached irony, but a
serious consideration of the practicability of Ford's own literary project.
Thus to consider The Good Soldier adequately represented with the judgment that
Dowell's feudal narrative aesthetic fails would be a false start, for it would ignore the allimportant ambiguity in Ford's association with Dowell. The Good Soldier is neither an uncritical
production of 'feudal ideology' nor an entirely detached auto-criticism of Ford's love for the
feudal. While the latter thesis—taking a detached, emotionally-distant Ford as its basic
assumption—could be an approach to the novel, it would necessarily miss the great force of the
text. Ford's constant emotional implication in the text's valuations and criticisms means that there
in Dowell's and Edward's ridiculousness is not merely entertainment for the reader but Ford's
own position in the text.
To arrive at an appreciation of this position, it is necessary to look more closely at the
ambiguity of Edward's status as aesthetic object for Dowell. Is it possible, at least partially or
intermittently, that Edward succeeds in representing feudal aesthetics—even that Dowell's
representation of him succeeds in doing so? The possibility of this success has, I suspect, been
insufficiently posed to date: Edward's failings as 'The Good Soldier' have been so apparent to
critical readers of The Good Soldier that the idea of Edward as an actual Good Soldier has been
almost written off as a subject of criticism.
This, I think, has been a mistake. In the rush to uphold Ford's 'real' or 'final' judgment on
Edward, the significant degree to which he does represent an attractive version of 'le Bon
Chevalier' has been overlooked. Edward does so sufficiently enough that he is a compelling
figure or even a desirable one, to many of the women in the novel and to Dowell. He is even

48
insistently compelling, despite an awareness of his shortcomings, to Ford and the reader: to be
sensitive to Ford's portrayal of Edward is to understand that, at least to an extent, his character is
attractive.
An exemplary passage is Ford's description of Edward playing polo:
Once when we were at Wiesbaden watching him play in a polo match against the
Bonner Hussaren I saw the same look come into his eyes, balancing the possibilities,
looking over the ground. The German Captain, Count Baron Idigon von Lelöffel, was
right up by their goal posts, coming with the ball in an easy canter in that tricky German
fashion. The rest of the field were just anywhere. It was only a scratch sort of affair.
Ashburnham was quite close to the rails not five yards from us and I heard him saying to
himself: 'Might just be done!' And he did it. Goodness! He swung that pony round with
all its four legs spread out, like a cat dropping off a roof …
Well, it was just that look that I noticed in his eyes: 'It might,' I seem even now to hear
him muttering to himself, 'just be done'” (26-7).
The passage has an aesthetic quality that is compelling or even stirring: Dowell has in effect
overlayed the polo match with the characteristics of a tournament; and it is this air of martialism
that gives Edward's participation in a fairly Victorian, fairly bourgeois sport the faint echo of
feudal combat. Through this willingness to read the feudal into the contemporary—and the
heroic into the ordinary—Edward's fairly mundane phrase—the claim that 'it might just be done,'
speaking of a polo match, is not necessarily possessed of ringing grandeur—becomes in Dowell's
eyes a battle-cry, repeated for dramatic effect as Dowell has Edward 'swinging his pony round' to
the chase.
And yet when Dowell so intentionally sets his description next to the culture of conflict
and tournament in which l'Histoire de Bayard takes place, is there not something suddenly
lacking in Edward's version? For Bayard, conflict carries the real risk of mortality—he is, unlike
Edward, an active soldier, and even tournament 'mock-combat' was potentially lethal. For
Edward, it is not even a question of combat: the tourney Dowell describes here is of polo, not

49
jousting; and the steeds involved are not battle-horses but ponies.
Thus suddenly and drily, Edward's polo match and the grim seriousness with which he
counters Count von Lelöffel begin to appear laughable. On a sufficiently careless reading, one
comes away impressed with Edward's pony-mounted heroism; but on a second look, the comic
under-proportionality of the scene in relation to the Bayard text becomes clear.
The kicker, then, comes with Dowell's metaphor: when Edward's pony spins around, legs
spread in all directions, Dowell writes—in the midst of a carefully chosen syntax of heroism—
that it is “like a cat dropping off a roof.” Feudal poetics grind to a halt: the metaphor itself,
supposed to represent the act of poetic transformation, buckles into comic ruins when Edward's
knightly prowess is compared to the poor feline victim of Dowell's literary imagination.
Thus Ford's use of comic poetic failure as a critical lens for feudal ideology is not in the
least unsophisticated. The effect of this passage depends on Ford's ability—contingently—to
really successfully write the poetics of feudal combat into a polo match. What separates this
criticism for mere parody is Ford's refusal fully to disentangle himself from his relationship with
the feudal. Edward's polo-playing shows the heart of this ambiguity: at the same time, Ford has
both a real attraction to the rhetoric of danger and heroism and an appreciation of its comic
weakness. It would be off-base to suggest that this ambiguity constitutes a short-coming of the
novel. Instead, Ford gives a complex and incisive criticism of the relationship of feudal ideology
to the modern—a critique that, in directing itself precisely toward his own emotional complicity
in the ideology of the feudal, was unmatched among those of his artistic peers similarly
interested in the modern-feudal relationship.
Ford's ability to critically evaluate the appeal of feudal ideology to modern artists—and

50
even, in Dowell's work as a case study, its actual deployment in poetics—is an enormous coup
for him. Consider a passage in which Dowell enacts this transposition of the feudal onto the
modern: “We never did take another look at Beaucaire of course—beautiful Beaucaire, with the
high, triangular white tower, that looked as thin as a needle and as tall as the Flatiron, between
Fifth and Broadway” (16). Here Dowell-as-author is very much with the times: the aesthetics
markers of contemporary modern life—in this case, modernist architecture—are identified and
imbued with the power, vitality, or beauty of the very early modern. Dowell's comparison—or
metaphoric identification—between the Flatiron and Beaucaire fits perfectly next to Marinetti's
metaphor, in the Futurist Manifesto, between a war-horse and a speeding car—and both, in the
logic of The Good Soldier, are comparable with the equivalence Dowell sees between
Ashburnham's polo match and 'deeds, acts, and triumphs' of Bayard. Each of these metaphors
proposes to find the feudal within the modern—and the only separation between them is the
ultimate lucidity, on Ford's part, in seeing the failure of this metaphor and the detachment
between feudal representation and modern reality.
What sets Ford's text apart from the use of feudal reference and metaphor in Marinetti
and his contemporaries, then, is its awareness of the failure of Dowell's transpositional project.
Ford does not commit the error of literalism: Edward is, from the start, a failed attempt at the
feudal, and his failure constitutes a critique of the feudal identifications or pretensions of high
modernism.
At the close, however, this reading does not propose to weigh the historical and political
position, context, and ultimately, responsibility of The Good Soldier against its contemporaries.
Instead, they are cited here to give the comparison is raised primarily to highlight a literary and

51
perhaps far less definite question. What is lost to Ford's text through its lucidity? Does Ford's
account of the feudal in The Good Soldier ultimately find something de preulx, as de Mailles'
treatment does in Bayard?
The only answer possible, once the comedy of Edward's polo-match has burst out in
Dowell's description, is that that value is utterly lost. In refusing a blunt—and necessarily
blinkered—metaphoric equivalence between modernist representation and the feudal, Ford
sacrificed the possibility of another Good Soldier that he might have written—an authentically
stirring or noble account of modernist soldiery.
Thus Eliot's claim in “Tradition and the Individual Talent” on the relationship between
past and contemporary representation—“You cannot value him alone; you must set him, for
contrast and comparison, among the dead”—takes a new sense in Ford:. That is, it cuts both
ways: it is not only that value can only be found in comparison among the dead, but that it can be
lost there as well. In setting Ashburnham next to Bayard, The Good Soldier moves above all
toward this Eliotian research of the past; yet through it Ford does not ultimately arrive at 'value'
but at its destruction.

The central point of departure for this chapter, then, has been to resituate Ford's novel into
the context of a much older field of reference than has previously been considered. The depth of
Ford's interest in the medieval, together with his decision consciously to title and structure The
Good Soldier in reference to Jacques de Mailles' chivalric history L'histoire du Bon Chevalier,
means that such an effort at 'feudal contextualization' is vital to a clear reading of the novel. Thus
I have attempted to draw out, through an intertextual comparison with de Mailles' text, the

52
'feudal subconscious' of Ford's novel.
In particular, I have set Ford's protagonist Edward Ashburnham (the “Good Soldier” of
the novel's title) in comparison with the Chevelier Bayard, the subject of Jacques de Mailles'
history. The ways in which Ashburnham has been modeled after Bayard are considered first; and
this comparison then allows the degree to which Ashburnham falls short of his predecessor.
Where Bayard risks his life in battle, for instance, Ashburnham seems to risk very little in society
polo matches; where Bayard is concerned with real action over appearance, Ashburnham takes
great care in dressing himself and less for real soldiery; and where de Mailles' depiction of
Bayard emphasize his romantic dedication to a single—physically unattainable—beloved,
Ashburnham engages in a long series of middling affairs with his social inferiors.
Yet the comparison between the two texts is not limited to the relationship between
Bayard and Ashburnham. The more crucial idea put into consideration is the differences in
literary treatment in the two narratives. De Mailles, for Ford, is the model of a good narrator; he
manages successfully to represent Bayard as a Good Soldier. Indeed, insofar as he conveys this
sense to the reader, one could say that de Mailles is a Good Impressionist along Ford's lines.
Thus Dowell's task in writing “the Saddest Story” is to be de Mailles: he hopes to represent
Ashburnham, as de Mailles does for Bayard, as a worthy figure of mimesis.
This project, however, cannot succeed: the crux of Ford's authorial work is that Dowell's
heroicizing descriptions sound lofty and ringing on a quick glance, but the more closer they are
considered, the more they break down into a comic disproportion between Dowell's fauxchivalric prose and the deeply unremarkable reality of Edward. It is not so much that Edward is
unable to be the Good Soldier—one wonders if he even imagines himself in that role, or if it is

53
solely Dowell's fantasia that brings up the parallel—but that Dowell tries so hopefully, so
earnestly, and finally in such bad taste to distort him into equivalence with his namesake.
To a great extent, then, The Good Soldier is Ford's portrait of modernist authorship
attempting to transform modern reality into equivalence with an idealized feudal heroism. This
willful distortion—the same bad taste that makes Edward 'close enough' to a Good Soldier for
Dowell to attempt to round up—is for Ford at its core the same error that made the Futurists
consider modern warfare a form of contemporary heroism and the same error that would led
Pound to imagine Fascism as a modern Feudalism.
The Good Soldier is the evidence of Ford's willingness to go beyond these
contemporaries by sacrificing his attraction to feudal metaphor for the sake of critical lucidity.
Dowell may mistake Edward for Bayard, but Ford does not; and the novel stands as his critique
of the attempt to do so in modernist representation. “The Good Soldier,” the title that makes the
ligature between Edward and Bayard, is what Ford critiques: Dowell's use of this epithet is his
fundamental attempt, as narrator, to poetically bridge the gap between history and the present
and to transform Edward from reality to chivalric figure; and it is precisely that poetic
transformation that Ford arrests, pulls apart, and subjects to laughter.
And yet was Ford was merely a detached analyst of this failure of metaphor? Ford was a
lover of the feudal and a narrator of the contemporary; and the logical confluence of these two—
the attempt to create a modern narrative that epitomizes feudal ideals—is precisely what one
would expect from his writing. Instead, it is what Ford, almost unremarked, shifts onto the
shoulders of his near-double Dowell.
Thus it is the meaning of this shift—whether Ford successfully (and harmlessly)

54
distanced himself from Dowell, or whether he still suffered some loss in that disavowal—that
must be considered further. At the heart of the question, we will see, is the function of laughter in
The Good Soldier.

55

Chapter III
'Orgueil et aberration': Retaking The Good Soldier as Comedy

Ce pauvre diable s'est au moins défiguré, peut-etre s'est-il
fracturé un membre essentiel. Cependant, le rire est parti,
irrésistible et subit.16
(Baudelaire, “De l'essence du rire”).
Baudelaire writes of laughter that “le rire ... vient de la supériorité” (340)17, and argues
that this superiority is intimately linked to the inferiority or degradation of the object of comedy.
Were one to apply Baudelaire's analysis to The Good Soldier, it would suggest that the novel's
essential comic component—what provides the real fodder for the novel's laughter—is the
degradation of its protagonists. This degradation, I suspect, was the real technique of Ford's
comedy: it is the consistent failure of the novel's protagonists to be noble, beautiful, admirable
that he gives to the reader to laugh at. This laughter is what profoundly separates The Good
Soldier from a tragic novel; and at its most essential, it suggests the very impossibility of
Impressionist narrative to convey modern tragedy to the reader.
In this chapter, I will argue that this particularly destructive laughter was Ford's ars
poetica. The novel is certainly funny; but I hope to consider that humor systematically, by

16

17

'The poor devil is at the very least disfigured, perhaps has broken a vital limb. Yet laughter bursts out, irresistible
and sudden.'
“Laughter, they say, comes from superiority.”

56
attempting to trace the comedy found at specific plot moments back to a sustained and consistent
construction of the comic that is integral to the novel's characters, plot, and narrative. This
'sustained and consistent construction' is, as Baudelaire suggests, the inferiority or degradation of
the novel's subject: Ford's comic treatment of the sad events and the feudal pretensions of the
narrative serves to make them the object of laughter. In doing so, Ford detaches the reader's
experience from what Dowell has intended to produce: the (emotional) impressions he attempts
to convey are, through Ford's comic treatment, subjected to a critical rather than a sympathetic
appraisal.
First, then, I will critically resituate the key term of discussion, comedy, as a 'serious'
element of the novel. My point of departure is that previous critical readings of The Good
Soldier have considered its comic elements only as entertainment; I will argue that an accurate
reading of the novel depends on understanding this comedy as a destructive and critical force,
one that is fundamentally abrasive to the central emotional conceits of Dowell's narrative (love,
feudal virtue, sadness). This interpretation of 'serious comedy' will contextualize a reading of
The Good Soldier with critical interpretations of laughter and comedy by Aristotle and
Baudelaire, in order to out the quality of erosiveness that I have cited as fundamental to Fordian
comedy.
I will then turn to close readings of several sections of the novel, in order to show how
Ford uses the destructive quality of laughter to undermine what appear to be serious, central
values or mores of Dowell's narrative. This reading and its theoretical context will illuminate the
function of comedy in The Good Soldier at its most radical: an absolute undermining of Dowell's
claims that his narrative is “the Saddest Story,” which puts the novel's function as emotionally

57
compelling narrative—or as Impressionist narrative—completely in question. Finally, I will
briefly consider the implications of this comedy for The Good Soldier as a novelistic project.
What does Ford accomplish with the comic destruction of Dowell's serious novelistic enterprise?
Does Dowell's narrative still produce some tragic sensibility in its reader, despite the laughter it
provokes?

It may already be objected that to consider The Good Soldier' comedy as fundamentally
serious is too great an interpretive liberty. On the face of it, the humor in The Good Soldier
appears primarily in off-the-cuff, 'entertaining' comic passages. Are these not attached only
spuriously to the 'real structure' of the novel? In such an interpretive system, the 'serious' events
of the novel would constitute the real argument of the text and be read independently of the
humor that pops up at its margins—and the tone of Dowell's narration only encourages such an
interpretative choice, as Dowell uses comedy precisely to gloss over the gaps or aesthetically
galling moments in his narrative.
Here, however, author and narrator must be clearly distinguished. Does Ford really share
Dowell's proposition—that is, is Ford's use of humor intended merely to entertain, distract, and
cover up the untidy margins of the work? My wager is that he does not—that Ford ultimately
associates Dowell with this use of humor as entertainment, while he detaches his authorial
position from that relationship in order to take a far more critical position.
Nevertheless, the idea that Ford used comedy merely for entertainment—merely to invite
his reader comfortably into the text and win his admiration—is not is not without substance.
Perennially in search of success with the reading public, and perennially in need of income from

58
book sales, Ford developed a mania for entertainment, manifested in a constant, overwhelming
use of both melodrama and humor when writing in his own voice.18
Thus in Ford's own literary voice, both comedy and sadness are subsumed to the general
necessity of interesting, entertaining, or captivating the reader—a necessity that springs from
Ford's desire, both emotional and financial, for broad public success. In Joseph Conrad: A
Personal Remembrance, he writes that
We agreed on this axiom:
The first business of Style is to make work interesting: the second business of Style is
to make work interesting: the third business of Style to make work interesting: the
fourth business of Style is to make work interesting: the fifth business of Style ….
Style, then, has no other business (80).
Ford shows an ironic sensibility in his mock-personification of “Style,” for his argument is
precisely that Style is invested in 'business,' that Style is used to attract the attention, the interest,
and—Ford wished—eventually the goodwill of the reader. Humor is one of the many techniques
that this type of style uses to keep the reader's attention, and it appears often as one of the lowest
of them, a sort of cringing stand-in when good writing is no longer possible and Ford attempts a
sort of comic banter with the reader.
The assumption that comedy serves only to entertain—which Ford advanced in his
critical work, though not, I will argue, in The Good Soldier itself—has been the fundamental
assumption of critical readers who discuss The Good Soldier as comedy. It provided the
interpretative foundation of Mark Schorer's analysis “Comedy and The Good Soldier” (1948),
the article which introduced the 'comic reading' of The Good Soldier as a critical principle for
understanding the novel. The effect of Schorer's contribution a half-century later is the self18

To follow a strict differentiation between author and narrator, it is Dowell's—not Ford's—sense of humor that
appears in the The Good Soldier. “On Impressionism,” however, provides excellent examples of Ford's use of
humor as a way to cozy up with his reader.

59
evidence of the novel's comic element, or in Schorer's words, the idea that The Good Soldier is a
"great work of comic irony" (305); but this self-evidence has come at the price of criticism that
'takes comedy seriously.' In a word, Schorer's decision to consider The Good Soldier merely
ironic, and not treat it on the level of criticism, has limited critics—however sophisticated their
analysis might be—to consider the novel merely as entertainment, never as a more 'serious' thesis
on modern narrative and its inability to convey human affairs—love, conflict, tragedy—with
dignity.
It is worth at least a brief consideration of this critical text. Schorer writes: "As in most
great works of comic irony, the mechanical structure of The Good Soldier is controlled to a
degree nothing less than taut, while the structure of meaning is almost blandly open, capable of
limitless refractions" (305). Schorer has only here introduced the idea that The Good Soldier is a
work “of comic irony;” and yet already a great deal of ground has been covered—perhaps so
much that the apparent self-evidence of his terminology has not been explored. In effect, Schorer
skips straight from classification ("As in most works") to the question of the novel's meaning
("almost blandly open, capable of limitless refractions"), where he finds the dizzying moral
confusion that results from Ford's introduction of comedy into—in Benjaminian terms—the fatenovel.
But is The Good Soldier, as Schorer writes, simply a work of 'comic irony?' Irony, after
all, depends on a clean detachment between the author and the ironic claim: the humor value is
precisely that the author is not present where he claims to be. As has been shown, Ford and
Dowell have a considerably more complex relationship: Dowell is, like Ford, an enthusiast of
feudal culture; he shares Ford's sensibility for tragedy; and he, like Ford, is an Impressionist

60
writer. Indeed, the whole sense of The Good Soldier is lost if one considers ironic detachment as
the only form of comedy: it is precisely Ford's own penchant for the tragic that is at play in
Dowell. Thus The Good Soldier is not simply comedy for comedy's sake: at stake in Ford's
portrait of Impressionist writing—in his portrait of Dowell, that is to say—is the question of
whether Ford's own writing could transform human life into literary tragedy.
Thus Schorer's error was to consider the term comedy itself excessively self-evident. He
has identified The Good Soldier as a comedy, yet without a strict definition of comedy; and thus
while his analysis criticism succeeds in a sort of raw classification by genre, it fails to illuminate
the real sense or effect of Ford's use of the comic. Could The Good Soldier employ comedy in a
far more serious way—as a critique of the ability of modern narrative to present any compelling,
meaningful story—than the lightness of literary irony?
Thus the lack of specificity in Schorer's text on comedy is a point of departure for a far
more active reading of the function of comedy in the novel. Let us suppose an alternate thesis:
that the comedy of The Good Soldier is not in the least expendable but goes to the heart of what
is 'serious' in the novel. It is in comedy that the failure of Dowell's narration to transform
Edward, Leonora, and Florence into tragic characters—characters over whose fates we might
feel sorrow. Precisely at the moment we begin to feel this sorry, their ridiculousness becomes
apparent; and it is that ridiculousness that is at the heart of the comic.
In order to reframe this discussion of comedy, then, I would like to replace Schorer's
fundamental assumption—that comedy, as entertainment, amuses by showing something
intrinsically positive or 'happy'—with a negative definition of comedy, one that points to its
dependence on ridiculousness, weakness, or aesthetic lapse as the source of laughter.

61
Aristotle's brief treatment of comic in the Poetics provides an opening for this
redefinition. Aristotle insists strongly upon the importance of ugliness or lowness in comedy.
Indeed for him it is the central or definitive element: “Poetry then became subdivided, according
to the character proper to each kind of poet: serious people imitated fine actions and the actions
of good men, whereas more ordinary people imitated the actions of inferior men” (414-15). The
former—the imitation of the good and the beautiful—became tragedy, and the latter—the
imitation of the low and the ugly—became comedy.
What is the importance of this ugliness? At the heart of laughter in Aristotle's definition is
a certain disgusting or repulsive quality. In focusing precisely on this quality, then, comedy does
a certain damage to its subject. The Good Soldier, as much as Greek comedy, is fundamentally
concerned with what is wrong or deformed in its characters. In representing precisely that
ugliness, comedy bars these characters from what what Aristotle calls mimesis and what
Benjamin calls the 'warmth of a stranger's fate': a character cannot be at once laughable and the
object of profound association.
Nevertheless, Aristotle's main discussion in Poetics is of course of tragedy, and he
dismisses comedy's imitation of ugliness, though harmful, as fundamentally unimportant. He
writes:
As we said above, comedy is an imitation of inferior things and people. They are not
absolutely bad, however; the point is that the laughable is part of the ugly. It is a sort of
mistake, an ugliness that does not give pain or cause destruction. For example, the
comic mask is something ugly and distorted, but causes no pain.
In essence, comedy poses no threat here. It does erode the value or nobility of its own subject as
with the “ugly and distorted” mask; but that subject—“the actions of inferior men”—has already
been lacking in value and nobility. There is thus no loss from the distortion of the comic: the

62
comic “causes no pain” because it shows the ugliness only of that which is already low, and
never turns its gaze to what is held in esteem.
The destructive effect of comedy is thus perceptively noted by Aristotle; but he also holds
it essentially unimportant because of the strict genre delineation between tragedy and comedy.
Comedy imitates low actions and represents their ugliness; tragedy imitates “fine actions and the
actions of good men” and represents their noble qualities. Because of this delineation between
the two, tragedy is protected from the erosive effects of comedy's tendency to make its characters
repulsiveness. It is the firm separation of genres, the careful investiture of the comic into the
ritual and practice of comedy, that protects tragedy from coming face to face with the laughable.
The comic mask can thus indeed be said to “cause no pain,” because the ugliness it shows is
always expected, delimited, temporary. It is in a word “not absolutely bad”: comedy for Aristotle
is never absolute, never intrudes into the general sense of life, but reserved in the sphere of the
contingent, the temporary, the 'low.'
Thus Aristotle does not even need to articulate a concern that the comic might intrude
into the tragic. Happy to avoid doing so: the involuntary intrusion of the comic into the tragic—
or the escape of the comic from the delimited into the general—would bring a fundamental
tremblement into his system of poetics. If “the actions of good men” are represented as a model
for the lives of the audience, the intrusion of laughter does not only destroy the aesthetic effect of
that representation but its purpose as well.
This point cannot be overstated. It is not merely that, if made comic, tragedy loses its
tactical gains and must start over. Too much has already invested too much in the tragic to
sacrifice it so freely: the actions of tragic heroes, if made laughable, do not merely cease to be a

63
didactic model, but go farther and become a source of horror.19 This is one of the real effects of
comedy in The Good Soldier then: the investment that Dowell has made in the importance, the
value, and the sadness of its characters comes crashing down with the introduction of the comic,
and the reader is mired in the pathos of tragic characters who are only laughable.
This strangely permanent horror comes from the sudden erasure of all investment made in
the tragic. For Aristotle, tragedy consists most importantly of an identification with the actions of
good men: when those actions suddenly become laughable, it is one's own identification with
them that must be cut off or abandoned. It is for this reason that Bergson writes that “Il semble
que le comique ne peut produire son ébranlement qu'à la condition de tomber sur une surface
d'âme bien calme, bien unie … Le rire n'a pas de plus grand ennemi que l'émotion” (Le rire, 3)20 :
the comic, when it is read 'safely'—as entertainment—depends for the reader's protection on the
absolute separation between reader and comic subject. What dies absolutely in the comic is an
identification with the subject of comedy: it is one's attachment, in Aristotle's language, to 'the
good' and to 'the noble' that is sacrificed when one laughs at them.
This reading of Aristotle has already, however, gone as far as it can. Indeed, in forcing
Aristotle's genre classifications to extend out of their natural domain in order to formulate the
intrusion of comedy into the tragic, I have already taken his ideas significantly à l'oblique. To go
farther it is necessary to move to a theorization of the comic that interests itself precisely in this
involuntary intrusion and the damage it causes, a theorization which focuses precisely on the
'pain' that Aristotle holds absent from comedy, and one which, in the place of fixed genre19

20

It is for this reason that Edward does not ever become—though we might prefer it—a simple comic buffoon.
Instead his lowness does not merely amuse: there is a quality of fascination mixed with the horror he produces. If
there is at the close of The Good Soldier thus a kind of tragedy, it is the tragedy of Edward's comicness—the
purely literary tragedy that the tragic hero cannot exist.
'It seems that the comic cannot produce its ébranlement [shaking, cf. tremblement] except on the condition of
falling upon the surface of a fully calm and unified soul ... Laughter has no greater enemy than emotion.'

64
delimitation, insists precisely on tremblement—on the intersection between sadness and comedy
that Ford brings about in The Good Soldier.
The exemplary text for this tremblement, then, is Baudelaire's De l'essence du rire: it is
precisely in Baudelaire that one meets with the juncture of the bohemian—the figure of modern
tragedy—and the restlessness of a comic sensitivity that does not allow for tragic sentiment; and
on the link between ugliness and comedy, Baudelaire finds himself strikingly close to Aristotle.
He writes:
Chose curieuse et vraiment digne d’attention que l’introduction de cet élément
insaisissable du beau jusque dans les œuvres destinées à représenter à l’homme sa propre
laideur morale et physique !21
Baudelaire's articulation of the comic shares an essential idea with Aristotle's: he
describes comedy as fundamentally concerned with a depiction of ugliness—or to go slightly
further, with the effort to find and portray the ugliness at the heart of the comic subject and its
lofty pretensions. This, in brief, is the 'damage' done in comedy: comic representation takes a
subject with pretensions to seriousness and introduces it: “Adventavit asinus, / Pulcher et
fortissimus.”22 In doing so, whatever value that might have been held suffers an absolute loss of
their gravity. Here we begin to understand, perhaps, why Ford's perception of his own
ridiculousness in Squerries Park only increased his misery: once his tragic performance had
become comic, it was his ability to experience sorrow over his loss itself that was lost.
Baudelaire departs firmly from Aristotle, however, when he writes that comedy 'is
destined to represent to man his own moral and physical ugliness,' rather than 'the moral and
physical ugliness of others.' The latter is in essence Aristotle's claim when he writes of 'the
21

22

‘A curious and truly attention-worthy thing, the appearance of this elusive element of the beautiful even in those
works destined to represent to man his own moral and physical ugliness' (334).
“The ass arrived, beautiful and most brave.” (Beyond Good and Evil, 15; translation given by Kaufmann.)

65
actions of low men:' comedy causes laughter, for Aristotle, over an ugliness that is entirely
exterior to and absolutely separated from the viewing subject. Baudelaire insists instead on the
firm connection between the reader and the subject of laughter: one's laughter is, for Baudelaire,
always being turned inward; and the damage it is does is never external or violent, but instead
personal, infinitesimal, absolute.
How does this damage subtly return, then, from the object toward which comedy is
directed back to the one who has laughed at it? Let us consider Baudelaire's very concrete
example:
Pour prendre un des exemples les plus vulgaires de la vie, qu'y a-t-il de si réjouissant dans
le spectacle d'un homme qui tombe sur la glace ou sur le pavé, qui trébuche au bout d'un
trottoir, pour que la face de son frère en Jésus-Christ se contracte d'une façon désordonnée,
pour que les muscles de son visage se mettent à jouer subitement comme une horloge à
midi ou un joujou à ressorts ?23
In Baudelaire's example, we seem at first to find the most common example, not of comedy, but
of tragedy: a man falls on the sidewalk, 'at the very least disfigured, perhaps having broken a
vital limb.' The one who sees the fall—the falling man's equal as his 'brother in Jesus Christ,' and
who could easily be the one who falls—should by all rights experience sorrow: in the brief story
he sees elapse, it is the image of himself who is injured. Without being physically injured by the
other man's fall, then, he should nevertheless feel for him. In Baudelaire's account, then, a 'good
reader'—one who does not laugh—is defined by his ability to sympathize with tragic events,
even those on the smallest scale.
And yet laughter breaks out. The man has, after all, only stumbled; and it seems—from
Baudelaire's evidently hyperbolic account of broken limbs and disfigurements—that the source
23

'To take one of life's most lowly examples, what is so amusing in the sight of a man who falls on ice or over a
cobblestone, who trips at the end of a sidewalk, that the face of his brother in Jesus Christ should contract wildly,
that the muscles of his face should begin suddenly to play like a clock at noon, like a jack-in-the-box?' (341).

66
of this laughter is the onlooker's disbelief that something truly injurious has occurred. Or better,
his unwillingness to believe in that injury: laughter bursts out at the moment that the onlooker,
unmoved by the fallen man's injury, is utterly detached from the sympathy that he should feel.
Who, then, is injured by the onlooker's laughter? Not, it seems, the one who has fallen:
his concerns are with his more immediate and more physical injury, to which laughter has little
relation. Rather it is for the one who participates only from a distance—who suffers loss only, we
could say, only insofar as he identifies himself with the man who falls in the drama played out
before him—that something is lost. At the moment he laughs at the man's error in failing to see a
raised cobblestone, he loses his ability to experience—to invest himself into—the man's pain.
Comedy thus necessarily blocks the reader's ability to associate with and to experience
tragedy: in identifying the 'ugliness' of the comic subject and thus separating him from the reader
—or forcing the reader to disown him—comedy makes the fundamental associative act of tragic
reading impossible.
In the brief excerpt from Mizener's biography of Ford that appeared in the introduction to
this text, it is the same comedy that interrupts Garnett's ability to experience or sympathize with
Ford's moment of melancholy. Garnett is struck by the incongruity when Ford pauses to check
his watch; and at the moment that he notes this comic sense in Ford's actions he is cut off from
tragic sentiment.
Thus Baudelaire and Ford find themselves in accord here on one particularly fundamental
point: real comedy is not, in its most proper sense, a purely literary game. Instead, it is
necessarily a lived experience: the reader of a ridiculous tragedy is forced to laugh; it is this
laughter that cuts him off from the text and denies him the possibility of sympathy or investment

67
with its claims to tragedy. Comedy thus stands between the reader and the experience of tragedy
—and as the example of Ford's melancholy in the park showed, this experience is not necessarily
literary. Just Ford attempts to identify the fundamental sadness in his own life, his awareness of
his own ridiculousness as he checks the time cuts him off from doing so. It is for this reason that
Baudelaire writes that the comic is “destined to represent to man his own moral and physical
ugliness:” it stands in the way of experiencing sadness by pointing out what is mundane, what
sticks out, what resists tragic depiction.
It is for this reason that Benjamin's theorization of the novel—a theorization that depends
on the deeply personal relationship between reader and character—is so well-juxtaposed with
Baudelaire's idea of the comic. What is lost, for Baudelaire, is all that is won from the novel by
the reader: it is “the hope of warming his shivering life with a death he reads about” (101) that is
absolutely lost when the novelistic character is made laughable.
It is this discovery—that comedy profoundly undermines the possibility of experiencing
tragedy—that Dowell will make in The Good Soldier. Overwhelmed with the melancholy of “the
Saddest Story,” he finds that finds that comedy is the only way to escape the overwhelming
sadness of his narrative. This is a barely-stated tenet of Dowell's writing: his dependence on
comedy to smooth over the incongruities of his narrative and to ward off maudlin sadness at its
most overwhelming is omnipresent, yet almost never acknowledged.
But in one of his most illuminating moments—almost buried in the text—Dowell
explains the meaning of the comic treatment that appears so consistently in his narrative.
“Forgive my writing of these monstrous things in this frivolous manner,” he writes; “If I did not I
should break down and cry” (47). What more diabolic admission? What more surprising claim,

68
from the narrator of “the Saddest Story,” that he wishes to separate himself from sadness and
retreat into the security of the ironic?
At the heart of what is shocking here is the realization that the comic tone in Dowell's
writing—a tone which until now I have considered involuntary, unsdesirable, accidental—might
properly termed a strategy in Dowell's narrative treatment. I had argued that the incongruities
and disproportions of Dowell's attempt to transform Edward Ashburnham simply rise to the point
of uncontainability and burst out into the text. And yet—even if it is not Ashburnham that he
treats comically—is it not Dowell who has unleashed the forces of self-awareness, of separation,
of un-tragedy?
Dowell is not alarmed at the outset, of course, by the anesthetic effects of laughter—using
laughter to avoid excessive tragic emotion was after all his idea. And this carefree anesthesia
would work, indeed, in a less careful reading: humorous moments offer themselves to be read
over quickly, and it is precisely because they are not to be taken seriously that they are amusing.
Like Baudelaire's onlooker, laughter is an escape from the unpleasantness of sorrow—and it is
only much later that this laughter will be seen to impede, not only sorrow at that moment, but the
very core of narrative tragedy.
Ford, however, refuses to let this failure of humor be glossed over. The longer a
humorous moment is considered, the less productive of real laughter it becomes, but the more
profoundly it seems to put the Dowell's fundamental assumptions—on feudal aesthetics, love,
virtue—into question. Let us consider, then, a few moments where comedy appears—
intentionally, it seems—in The Good Soldier, in order to show how Dowell critiques or comically
'deflates' the pretensions or postures of the other characters. The first—the easiest, perhaps—is

69
his portrayal of Florence:
I fancy his wife's irony did quite alarm poor Teddy; because one evening he asked me
seriously in the smoking-room if I thought that having too much in one's head would
really interfere with one's quickness in polo. It struck him, he said, that brainy Johnnies
generally were rather muffs when they got on to four legs. I reassured him as best I
could. I told him that he wasn't likely to take in enough to upset his balance. At that
time the Captain was quite evidently enjoying being educated by Florence. She used to
do it about three or four times a week under the approving eyes of Leonora and myself.
It wasn't, you understand, systematic. It came in bursts. It was Florence clearing up one
of the dark places of the earth, leaving the world a little lighter than she had found it.
She would tell him the story of Hamlet; explain the form of a symphony, humming the
first and second subjects to him, and so on; she would explain to him the difference
between Armenians and Erastians; or she would give him a short lecture on the early
history of the United States. And it was done in a way well calculated to arrest a young
attention. Did you ever read Mrs. Markham? Well, it was like that ...” (33-34).
Here Ford is pursuing a number of comic threads within the same passage. One is a mockery of
Edward's character—Dowell, we can assume, is engaging in hyperbole to an extent when he
writes that Edward was worried over the possible effect of a few historical tidbits on his polo
game; but the hyperbole is effective comically because its exaggeration points to a certain truth,
the preoccupation of the 'sporting type' with physical ability to the neglect of intellectual
pursuits. But Ford simultaneously subtly undermines the intellectual as well: the 'education' that
Florence is giving Edward “under the approving eyes of Leonora and myself” is of course a
double-entendre for the physical component of Edward and Florence's affair, and thus the
supposed intellectualism that would detract from Edward's polo game is really another bodily
pursuit. “Education” is dealt a particularly harsh blow: on the one hand it is almost visibly put in
scare-quotes by the sexual metaphor, and on the other by the comparison of Florence's actual
lessons to the Mrs. Markham books24.
Through the wordplay at work here, then, Ford gives a more complex critique of
24

In a footnote, the Norton editor Martin Stannard describes Mrs. Markham the “writer of superficial history books
for children” (34).

70
Florence's worldview. The central point of Florence's character is her dedication to improvement,
given here as her drive toward “clearing up one of the dark places of the earth, leaving the world
a little lighter than she had found it.” Yet this “clearing up” is entirely disingenuous: her real
interest is creating a “dark place of the earth,” because it is precisely her affair with Edward that
she wishes to keep hidden. What is really 'sickening,' to use a Fordian term, is that Ford
establishes that Florence is not merely using 'education and improvement' as a pretext. If her act
were merely instrumental, a sort of 'decoy morality' covering up her real motives, her character
could even be called noble—in another context—for its dedication to romantic love. But
instrumental it is not: 'education and improvement' sets the entire tone of Florence's relationship
to Edward, because their sexual relationship, Ford has established, occurs precisely under the
sign of 'education.'
Comedy here thus quickly advances from its entry-point, word-play, to show Dowell's
absolute detachment from sympathy with his wife. Along the way, as the depth of the comic
increases, its practical humor value is overtaken by its more significant destructive force. The
entry-point of this passage—Ford's innuendo on education—is earnestly amusing; and yet the
closer the passage is read, the less it inspires outward laughter and the more thoroughly it
undermines Florence's moral system and self-representation. At the close it is only bitterly—that
is to say, not in the least amusingly—funny: Florence's value to Dowell, we might choose to put
it, has been absolutely lost.
In a second passage, we begin to move closer—that is to say, Dowell's comic disavowals
and disattachments move closer—to the heart of Dowell's own convictions. Here it is Edward's
self-articulation that comes in for critique. In the passage, Edward has met a Spanish dancer, La

71
Dolciquita, at a casino, slept with her, and in short order “discovered that he was madly, was
passionately, was overwhelming in love with her” (106). La Dolciquita, more reasonable, asks
for a “perfectly reasonable” hundred thousand dollars to continue the arrangement, and Edward,
wrapped up in his fantasies of love, is inconsolable:
Edward went mad; his world stood on its head; the palms in front of the blue sea
danced grotesque dances. … She had once been his mistress, he reflected, and, by all
the moral laws she ought to have gone on being his mistress or at the very least his
sympathetic confidante. But her rooms were closed to him; she did not appear in the
hotel. Nothing: blank silence. To break that down he had to have twenty thousand
pounds. …
He spent a week of madness; he hungered; his eyes sank in; he shuddered at
Leonora's touch. I daresay that nine tenths of what he took to be his passion for La
Dolciquita was really discomfort at the thought that he had been unfaithful to Leonora.
He felt uncommonly bad, that is to say—oh, unbearably bad, and he took it all to be
love. Poor devil, he was incredibly naif (107).
Edward—naive and even childish as he is—imagines himself deeply, 'truly' in love with La
Dolciquita. And were Dowell a less sensitive (a more 'faithful') chronicler, he might accept that
self-assessment, depicting Edward's affair with the dancer as a compelling instance of sudden,
selfless, romantic love.
But instead, Dowell is all too aware of Edward's personal history, and his narrative
Edward's attraction to La Dolciquita, contextualized with the legions of his other affairs, is
trivialized. Edward is, we imagine, unconscious of the comic contradiction in a would-be courtly
lover who imagines himself to be in love with his social inferiors—and is not not even content to
romanticize one Dulcinea, but instead projects his romantic fantasies onto each one he meets.
Dowell, however, is entirely aware of these contradictions: indeed, it is his telling that
emphasizes the comic deflation of Edward's romantic pretensions through hyperbole.
Thus what Edward perceives as real misery is, for Dowell, silly and weightless: his

72
conclusion that Edward “felt uncommonly bad, that is to say—oh, unbearably bad” bears the
clear signs, in its tepid equivalence between the casual ('uncommonly') and the romantic
('unbearably')articulations of Edward's sadness, of simple comic detachment. Edward's tragedy is
cliché for Dowell, and thus he does not feel whatever real pain is involved for Edward. Once
again, then, 'the Saddest Story' is, for its narrator, absolutely devoid of tragic experience.
But both of these examples, it is clear, have been fundamentally minor instances of the
destructive effect of laughter upon seriousness or sadness in The Good Soldier. In the first case—
the most lightly treated—it is Florence's self-representation that is problematized by the humor in
Dowell's description; in the second, it is Edward's idea of romance and self-idealization as a
romantic suitor that Dowell's comic awareness renders untenable. In both cases, Dowell's ability
to see the comic disjunctions or disproportions makes them laughable; but little loss comes to
Dowell from it, because it is not his own belief-system—or his own experience of sorrow—that
is put into question. In brief, what does it matter to Dowell if Edward's sorrow or Florence's
sorrow is laughable, so long as the emotional reality proper to him is not made laughable?
Nevertheless, we see Dowell's comfortable separation from this comedy be increasing
shaken the closer it approaches to his own position. Indeed, his ability to take this comedy truly
lightly depends on his distance from the character in question. Florence—for whom Dowell has
the most intense dislike—is an easy subject for comedy: Dowell's distance from her is such that,
in the Baudelairean scheme, he hardly feels the damage done in making her laughable, and the
comic depiction is simply tossed off in his writing. In Ashburnham's case, considerably more
time is spent in the representation; and it seems as though, even despite himself, Dowell feels a
certain pain at the realization that Ashburnham's affairs are no high romance, but mere burlesque.

73
What happens, then, when Dowell's own experience of loss—when the ruination of his
social circle, the essentially instantaneous disappearance of the whole context of his adult life—
becomes subject to appreciation as comic? That is to say: if Dowell so swiftly perceives the
failures, cliches, or misrepresentations in Florence's and Edward's self-pity, will he be able to
experience his own? It is here—at the moment Dowell makes his own investment in the text
subject to the comic—that laughter returns, as Baudelaire has predicted, upon its originator.
Dowell's dedication to the idea of the text's sadness—a dedication that may, it seems, be his only
motivation in writing the text—will be put into question at the moment his losses are, like the
fallen man's injuries, considered merely laughable.
It is thus at the very close of the text—the Fordian 'masterstring'—that tragedy reaches its
most intense pitch, and where laughter bursts out in its place. This moment comes as Edward
prepares to commit suicide—first because of his failure to satisfy Leonora; then because of his
inability to pursue Nancy; and finally because of his remorse for the death of Florence. His mind,
Ford suggests, is full of tepid literary allusions appropriate for the moment:
Well, Edward was the English gentleman; but he was also, to the last, a
sentimentalist, whose mind was compounded of indifferent poems and novels. He just
looked up to the roof of the stable, as if he were looking to Heaven, and whispered
something that I did not catch.
Then he put two fingers into the waistcoat pocket of his grey, frieze suit; they came
out with a little neat pen-knife—quite a small pen-knife. He said to me:
'You might just take that wire to Leonora.' And he looked at me with a direct,
challenging, brow-beating glare. I guess he could see in my eyes that I didn't intend to
hinder him. Why should I hinder him? I didn't think he was wanted in the world, let his
confounded tenants, his rifle-associations, his drunkards, reclaimed and unreclaimed,
get on as they liked. Not all the hundreds and hundreds of them deserved that that poor
devil should go on suffering for their sakes.
When he saw that I did not intend to interfere with him his eyes became sort and
almost affectionate. He remarked:
'So long, old man, I must have a bit of rest, you know.'
I didn't know what to say. I wanted to say, 'God bless you', for I also am a

74
sentimentalist. But I thought that perhaps that would not be quite English good form,
so I trotted off with the telegram to Leonora. She was quite pleased with it (162).
Here, then, is where Dowell should most like to break down into an overwhelming
sorrow. In Edward's death, all the sadnesses in the novel—the failure at romance, the failure at
marriage, the failure at soldiery—are once more restated; and Edward's death signifies the final
irreversibility of their existence, the reality that for Dowell nothing, not even his friend's life, will
be spared. That is to say, it is here that he should like, with Bertran de Born, to claim an
experience of real, irreparable loss:
Estouta Mortz, plena de marrimen,
Vanar to potz quel melhor chavalier
As tolt al mon qu'anc fos de nula gen,
Quar non es res qu'a pretz aia mestier
Que tot no fos el jove rei engles.25
The experience of loss and death should be tragic for Dowell, and his description of them should
be able to produce the same experience of tragedy in the reader. And yet what is lost—not only
in Edward's death, but in Florence's as well, and in Nancy's madness, and in Dowell's
estrangement from Leonora, all of which Edward's death represents as the final, climactic event
of the plot—is his connection to the network of subjects that, through the whole length of the
novel, he has carefully, minutely, irreparably treated with mockery. What is lost to Dowell then—
simply to take him at his word—is nothing: in treating the other characters only as comic figures,
25

Proud Death, full of grief,
Boast well you may that the best knight [chavalier]
Have taken from the world that ever was in any people,
For no thing exists of value
That did not belong solely to the young English king.
Pound's rendering:
O skilful Death and full of bitterness,
Well mayst thou boast that thou the best chevalier
That any folk e'er had, hast from us taken;
Sith nothing is that unto worth pertaineth
But had its life in the young English King.

75
Dowell has bound himself to represent their downfall not with tears but with laughter.
This is the reason, then, that the final lines of the text are so utterly unproductive of
emotion for the reader. Of the moment that Edward's farewell might allow him some final poetic
send-off to their friendship, Dowell can write only that “I didn't know what to say.” He gives a
token acknowledgment to what has become a mere pretext of emotionality, but waves it away (“I
thought that perhaps that would not be quite English good form”) with the lightness that only
absolute disattachment—only the absolute lack of feeling—can provide. Finally, he writes, he
“trotted off with the telegram:” it is no funeral march with which the text ends, but a caper away
from death and away from somberness.
Dowell's originary decision to venture into the comic, then, inexorably undermines his
attempt to find some kind of sadness—and some meaning—within the story. Comedy, far from
producing 'entertainment' or 'distraction,' points precisely to what is serious and unnerving in The
Good Soldier: the failure of Dowell's representation of 'The Saddest Story' to inspire admiration,
empathy, or sadness. Fordian comedy is profoundly erosive to the attempt to produce these
emotions in the reader—and the production of these emotions is the essential task of the
Impressionism. Comedy thus seems to burst out unbidden in Impressionist writing: it is precisely
where the most heavy-handed, maudlin sadness is insisted upon that laughter appears, and this
laughter ruins the emotional effect absolutely.
Thus what is suggested, before the close of The Good Soldier, is an essential damage
done to the possibility of modernist narrative. Dowell—for all that his narrative has succeeded so
little—is no thoughtless or ignorant writer; and the material he worked with—the incredible
failure of his marriage, to say little of the suicide of his wife and of his closest friend—certainly

76
does not lack for tragic import. Yet precisely in moving toward this tragedy, Dowell arrives in the
end only at the tragedy of a life lived, in retrospect, with no value and no loss, but only the
ugliness shown in humor.

In this chapter, then, I have attempted to radically advance a reading of The Good Soldier
as comedy by linking Ford's comic treatment of the novel's plot with theoretical arguments on
the function of laughter and comedy. Through a close reading of Schorer's text, it is my argument
that while his sensitivity to the novel's fundamental tone led him to the right conclusion in
calling it a comedy, he fundamentally misunderstood the functioning of such a comedy. For
Schorer, comedy is necessarily, in the end, light-hearted: its purpose is to entertain. My
understanding of the role of the comic in The Good Soldier is absolutely different. As I proposed
in the introduction, the failure of Dowell's narration to furnish its characters' lives with a
compelling 'fatefulness' is the point of entry to a clear reading of The Good Soldier. Comedy is at
the heart of this 'failure of fatefulness': it is because Dowell's aesthetic sensibilities lead him into
ridiculousness that his narrative cannot be taken as “the Saddest Story.” In essence the laughter
that Dowell produces prevents his novel from being taken as a 'serious novel' or 'novel of fate' at
all.
Aristotle's analysis, that laughter springs from a profound ugliness in the comic subject,
does not go so far as to suggest a transference of this ugliness toward the one who laughs.
Baudelaire, however, suggests precisely this: his text implies that in laughing, one risks the
destruction of the value one holds in all else. Thus laughter is at its most dangerous when
involuntary—and this, then, is the reason that Dowell's initial choice to treat tragic plot events

77
with humor returns at the close to fundamentally undermine his attempt to cast the story as a
tragedy.
Through a close reading of the novel's several passages, I have shown how a
'Baudelairean reading' of The Good Soldier functions in practice—leading from Dowell's initial
humorousness toward the eventual collapse of his tragic narrative into comedy. A glimpse of
humor—as in a pun on 'education,' or in the dry understatement with which Dowell 'trots off'
from Edward's suicide—is the marker of a discontinuity in the text, a moment where Dowell's
attempt to portray the characters' motivations in serio fails to entirely function and, in response,
tries to cover the gap with humor.
Ultimately, the further this gap is plumbed, the further down it goes: what a careful
reading understands at the moment of Edward's suicide is the absolute lack of sadness that
Dowell can convey—or even experience—at the moment that should be his greatest loss. This,
then, is what Baudelaire suggests to a reading of The Good Soldier. It is in representing man's
'moral and physical ugliness' to himself that comedy decisively erodes the possibility of sadness
—for when that sadness should ultimately be provoked by human loss, it is only the loss of the
comically ugly that is felt; and that loss is, ultimately, one over which neither Dowell nor the
reader can be brought to tears.

78

Conclusion: Narrative, Comedy, Tragedy

Otros han litigado sobre el nombre, diziendo que no se avía de llamar
comedia, pues acabava en tristeza, sino que se llama tragedia. El primer
autor quiso darle denominación del principio, que fue placer, y llamóla
comedia. Yo viendo estas discordias, entre estos estremos partí agora por
medio la porfía y llaméla tragicomedia.26
Fernando de Rojas, introduction to La Celestina.

In the introduction to this text, I suggested that The Good Soldier cannot be adequately
understood if it is taken simply as a narrative or 'story.' This narrative-dependent criticism, which
I associate with Walter Benjamin's idea of novelistic 'fate,' has an enormous capacity for
illumination. Yet The Good Soldier works precisely to put that sense of narrative into question:
the emotional sympathy with its characters that the reader of conventional narrative should
experience is absolutely unavailable to a sensitive reader of The Good Soldier because of the
sudden intrusion of the comic into Dowell's apparently 'tragic' narrative.
If that claim is correct, then, the key to a reading of The Good Soldier—the key to an
understanding of the complex ligature and distance between Ford and Dowell—is the mechanism
of the comedy that intrudes into what would otherwise be a conventionally tragic novel. Where
Dowell's narration aspires to be high and lofty, where it hopes to bring sadness into the heart of
26

'Others have disputed the name, saying that it wouldn't do to call it comedy, since it ended in sadness, but that
instead it it should be called tragedy. The original author wanted to name it for its intention, which was pleasure,
and called it comedy. I, seeing these discords, have now set out between the two extremes, through the middle of
the discord, and called it tragicomedy.'

79
its reader, is precisely where the sensitive reader spots cracks in its very seriousness—a
seriousness which is the necessary foundation for any tragic text.

I opened this discussion of The Good Soldier with a consideration of Ford's theory of
literary Impressionism. This text is marked, I argued, by an inarticulated but fundamental
concern with the threat of laughter to the very possibility of experiencing tragedy in literature.
Ford argues that a mass of detail—the practical technique of Impressionism—is necessary to
convey the full force of an impression. Yet at the same moment, this technique poses a threat to
its own function: excessive insistence on detail in a text that means to portray overwhelming
human tragedy necessarily feels out of place, even comically so.
Ford attempts to resolve this contradiction with a moment of ultimate textual unification
—the deployment of the 'Impressionist master-string—at which this detail is brought together
into a sudden, sweeping experience of a single story or single impression. And yet when Ford
gives an example of this tragic denouement in his miniature Impressionist 'story of Mr Jones,'
what breaks out at the moment of conclusion is instead a sudden, fundamental comedy. The
Impressionist focus on minutiae is so necessarily opposed to emotional affectation that its
appearance at the heart of a tragic narrative renders it utterly ineffective. Thus at the close of a
theory that intends to articulate a means of transferring or producing emotional impressions, it is
not affective sadness but rather laughter that bursts out.
To consider the function of this comedy in The Good Soldier in practice, I then discussed
the major narrative choice made by Dowell, his decision to draft Edward Ashburnham as the
'Good Soldier' following the model of the Bon Chevalier as a model of feudal virtue. There, by

80
insisting on the comparisons Dowell sets up between the two 'Good Soldiers,' it was my
conclusion that Dowell's attempt at a poetic representation of Ashburnham—one that could also
inspire tragic sympathy in its reader—ultimately brought itself into an untenable position through
the overstatement of Ashburnham's soldierly qualities. Because of the inherent comedy of
Dowell's attempt to make Edward a real feudal hero, the text breaks under the strain. The
laughter produced when Dowell compares Edward's pony to a falling cat is the marker of the
failure of his text's attempt to directly equate the modern with the feudal.
In the final chapter, then, I turned to a deeper theoretical consideration of the
consequences of laughter, through a reading of analyses of laughter by Baudelaire and Aristotle,
in order to determine precisely how the comic works to undercut or anesthetize the tragic
elements of a text. My foundational claim was that previous readings of The Good Soldier have
not gone far enough in elaborating the implications of its understanding of comedy: to consider
the text merely as ironic or amusing does not allow for a reading of the serious significance of
the novel as considered as a critique of emotive or 'meaningful' narrative.
The suggestion I advanced through these two theoretical readings, then, was that the
'serious comedy' at play in The Good Soldier necessarily causes a simultaneous damage to the
'worth' or 'value' of its subject. Aristotle and Baudelaire agree on the idea that comedy inspires
laughter by indicating what is ugly in the comic subject; and thus my claim in reading The Good
Soldier is that the comic passages describing Edward, Florence, Leonora, and even ultimately the
whole totality of the plot tragedy point directly towards the flaws and lack of value there. This
laughter, then, is the symptom of the reader's loss of the worth that Dowell hopes to associate
with his characters; and without that necessary element of value, the novel's eventual outcome—

81
the demise of several of its characters—produces no feelings of tragic in the already-alienated
reader.
At the farthest reach of this analysis, Baudelaire's text suggests a kernel of intentionality
in Dowell's use of comedy. As Dowell himself notes, his comic sensibilities are a form of
protection at excessively tragic moments; and thus it seems that the aesthetic integrity of his
tragic depiction is first cracked at those moments—with regard to Florence, for instance—where
he uses his own poetic hyperbole to suggest failings. It is this usage of comedy, an ultimately
intentional one, that gets out of control and wrecks his project to inspire real sadness in the
reader.
At the core of the novel, then, is an unwilling slippage from tentative into absolute
comedy. In showing the comic implications of the other characters' self-articulations, Dowell
allows the hint of a joke into his text; but that joke seems to move relentlessly toward what
should be the heart of the text, his own assignment of value to the actions he narrates. With
Ashburnham's death at the very close of the novel, I argued, comedy has done its work: at the
moment Dowell should be most overcome with grief, he merely 'trots off' wordlessly, and his
telling inspires not pity but only a troubling detachment in the reader.
The comedy of The Good Soldier thus comes in the end to destroy tragedy. The tragedy
of the characters' actions—the element on which Dowell insists with the title “The Saddest
Story”—produces no effect on the reader, for all the reasons that have been discussed: there is
simply, at the close of Dowell's narrative, no character and no action for which the reader can
feel regret. If The Good Soldier is an anti-Benjaminian novel, then, the conclusion must be that it
is one from which the reader can draw no warmth. It is a novel that consigns us to the cold; and

82
thus Baudelaire's trembling, tremblement, becomes in the end un frisson, a shivering. Were one
to put The Good Soldier in Fordian terms, here its very end, it would be a novel that—for all the
labor of its Impressionist technique—can produce no sadness in its reader: it represents the grand
failure of Impressionism and emotional sensibility in narrative.

And yet if we have reached the end of this novel narratively, technically, theoretically—if
we are now situated in that space properly after the novel, the space in which our impressions of
its final effect coalesce—is it not the moment for another, a retrospective, judgment on the novel
that has been put behind us? That is to say: if we have come, through a complex and a contorted
reading of the novel, to the point where tragedy has lapsed into comedy and our once-sadness for
Dowell's loss has itself been lost to us—what is our judgment, then, on the loss of sadness and on
the lapse of tragedy?
It seems that Baudelaire has a final suggestion, a point of departure perhaps for this afterreading. He writes:
Remarquez que c'est aussi avec les larmes que l'homme lave les peines de l'homme, que
c'est avec le rire qu'il adoucit quelquefois son cœur et l'attire; car les phénomènes
engendrés par la chute deviendront les moyens du rachat.27
What can be made of this curious claim, coming as it does from a text so profoundly pessimistic
towards the effects of laughter, that it is in the moment after tragedy has been washed away by
comedy that the two become accessible once again, almost as a restitution for the harm they have
done? Is it too late to speak of redemption for a comic text?
This idea of redemption points us toward Baudelaire's most difficult—and most nearly
27

'And note as well that it is with tears that man washes away the sorrows of man, that it is with laughter that he
soothes and entices his heart at times; for the phenomena engendered by the fall will become the means of the
redemption.'

83
invisible—claim in the text, one which we have passed over too briefly:
Chose curieuse et vraiment digne d’attention que l’introduction de cet élément
insaisissable du beau jusque dans les œuvres destinées à représenter à l’homme sa propre
laideur morale et physique !28
In applying Baudelaire's text to The Good Soldier, we have considered only the second clause,
that comedy is 'destined to represent to man his own moral and physical ugliness.' And yet
according to Baudelaire, what appears in the ugliness indicated by comedy is—suddenly and
unexpectedly—the experience of an 'elusive element of beauty.'
This beauty, of course, appears in hindsight. Baudelaire writes of the one who laughs
“qu'il s'arrête au bord du rire,” qu'il “ne rit en tremblant,” qu'il “tremble d'avoir ri” (361-2).29
This grammatical slippage into the perfect tense indicates that “De l'essence du rire” is a text
written after the moment of laughter: it is written from a position of regret. The sadness one
experiences in this text, then, is of the second order: it is the sadness that wells up at the moment
comedy has already destroyed the reader's capacity for valuation itself, a sadness even for the
loss of sadness itself.
Thus Baudelaire seems to suggest first a comedy of the tragic—the destruction of tragic
sentiment in laughter—and only then a tragedy of comedy, an experience of the loss inherent in
laughter sufficiently profound to constitutes its own, perhaps even more authentic, moment of
sadness. This, then, is Baudelaire's 'rachat:' it is a an experience of tragedy in the loss of tragedy,
a last fleeting moment of loss at the moment when attachment itself seems to have disappeared.
Why have I turned back to Baudelaire so late in this consideration? Is there still a link
here to Ford's novel, a text that, I have argued, has already absolutely sacrificed the possibility of
28

29

‘A curious and truly attention-worthy thing, the appearance of this elusive element of the beautiful even in those
works destined to represent to man his own moral and physical ugliness' (334).
That 'he stops on the threshold of laughter,' 'he laughs only in trembling,' 'he trembles to have laughed.'

84
the tragic?
Yet the possibility of redemption depends, perhaps, on that absolute abandonment. It
strikes me that, in Baudelaire's sudden rediscovery of the tragic in the moment after its assumed
loss, there is still something of surprising aptitude for a reading of The Good Soldier. Is there not
at the very close—or even after the close—of Ford's text, a sudden remorse—not for the death of
Ashburnham, but for the lack of sadness upon his death? That is, could the tragedy at the close of
the novel be a tragedy of narrative—a tragedy not of the loss of Edward, but the loss even of the
possibility of the Good Soldier?
I have argued that at the close of the novel, the reader's experience upon Edward's death
is one of detachment. The attachment the reader should feel is absent, because through laughter
the novel has succeeded in irretrievably devaluing its hero. (That is to say, here we have
completed the first step of Baudelaire's two steps: tragedy and loss have been irreversibly
undermined by laughter.) And yet precisely in this experience of detachment, the reader has lost
something real, something palpable, even something vital. In not feeling the loss of the Good
Soldier, what is denied to the reader is loss itself: the experience of tragedy is undone by the
text's comedy.
Here, then, is Baudelaire's final move. What reaction can one have here when, for having
laughed, even loss itself no longer occasions sadness? Can one, if the death of the Good Soldier
is absolutely unlamentable, do anything but cry?
It seems, then, that the loss of the possibility of tragedy itself might even, at the end of
day, be a more authentic experience of the tragic than the 'real' loss it recuperates. Should we
weep as hard for the death of Edward as we do upon discovering that there is, in the end, no

85
Good Soldier at all?
And this, it seems, might even be the situation of poor Ford at Squerries Park. At the
moment where tragedy fails in comedy, a second—perhaps even a deeper—tragedy breaks out:
the tragedy of the failure of loss itself to occasion sadness. What was Ford really weeping for?
His own career, the train he would miss, the melancholy songs he sang? Or could it not have
been, at the close, his detachment from them all—and his own laughability in sorrow—for which
he was crying in Squerries Park?
And thus it could be, perhaps, that Ford manages to stage precisely the redemption of the
irretrievable that Baudelaire has so tenuously indicated—and that at or after its close, in spite of
its own refusal, The Good Soldier ultimately turns back toward tragedy. For it is this second—
and perhaps deeper—tragedy that is given to the reader in The Good Soldier.

Bibliography
Anonymous. Lazarillo de Tormes. Madrid: Ediciones Cátedra, 1987.
Aristotle. Poetics. “The Philosophy of Aristotle.” 413-431. Trans. Wardman and Creed
NY: Mentor Books, 1963.
Baudelaire, Charles. “De l'essence du rire.” Curiosités esthétiques. Paris: Alphonse
Lemerre, 1890.
Benjamin, Walter. “The Story-teller.” Illuminations. 83-109. Trans. Harry Zohn NY:
Schocken, 1969.
Bertrand de Born. ¨Si tuit li dol e·lh plor e·lh marrimen.” Poems of Bertrans de Born.
James H. Donalson, ed. Online, accessed via brindin.com 4/22/11.
Bergson, Henri. Le Rire. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1947.
Champier, Symphorien. Les Gestes ensemble la vie du preulx Chevalier Bayard. Paris:
Imprimerie Nationale, 1992.
De Mailles, Jacques. La tresjoyeuse, plaisante et recreative Histoire, composée par le
Loyal Serviteur, des faiz, gestes, triumphes et prouesses du Bon Chevalier sans
paour et sans reprouche, le Gentil Seigneur de Bayart. Paris: Foucault
Librairie, 1827. E-text, accessed via voltaire-integral.com 2/12/11.
——. Histoire du Bon Chevalier sans peur et sans reproche le seigneur de Bayard.
Camille Rousset, trans. Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1872.
De Tocqueville, Alexis. De la Démocratie en Amérique. Paris: Gallimard, 1951.

De Rojas, Fernando. La Celestina. Madrid: Ediciones Cátedra, 1987.
Eliot, T.S. The Sacred Wood. Seventh ed. NY: Methuen, 1983.
Madox Ford, Ford. The Good Soldier. NY: WW Norton, 1995.
——. “On Impressionism.” Critical Writings of Ford Madox Ford. 33-55. Lincoln, NE:
University of Nebraska Press, 1964.
——. The Cinque Ports. London: Blackwood and Sons, 1900. Google Book Search.
Retrieved 4/22/11.
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso. “The Futurist Manifesto.” Trans. R.W. Flint. Apollonio,
Umbro, ed. Documents of 20th Century Art: Futurist Manifestos. NY: Viking
Press, 1973. 19-24.
Mizener, Arthur. The Saddest Story: A Biography of Ford Madox Ford.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Beyond Good and Evil. Walter Kaufmann, trans. NY: Random
House, 1966.
Paulhan, Jean. Les fleurs de Tarbes. Paris: Gallimard, 1990.
Pound, Ezra. “Planh for the Young English King.” American Poetry: The Twentieth
Century. 508. NY: Library of America, 2000.
Shellabarger, Samuel. The Chevalier Bayard. NY: The Century Co., 1928.
Schorer, Mark. “The Good Soldier as Comedy.” The Good Soldier. 305-310.
Watts, Ian. “Impressionism and Symbolism in Heart of Darkness.” Heart of Darkness.
311-36. 3rd Edition. NY: W.W. Norton, 1988.

