Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2014

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2014

Poppies, Panthers, and Paisanos: Nature and Work
in the Literature of the Industrial Age
Donald R. Long
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Long, Donald R., "Poppies, Panthers, and Paisanos: Nature and Work in the Literature of the Industrial Age" (2014). Senior Projects
Spring 2014. Paper 317.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2014/317

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2014 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Poppies, Panthers, and Paisanos:
Nature and Work in the Literature of the Industrial Age

A Senior Project submitted to
the Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Donald R. Long

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2014

Acknowledgements:
First and foremost, I must thank my academic advisor Eric Trudel, who not only was
exceedingly patient with me during this process, but also extraordinarily helpful. He also
gave me Proust, which is something I’ll struggle with marvelously for years. I’d also like
to thank Odile Chilton, who allowed me to read it in the original French, albeit much
more slowly, perhaps as it is meant to be read. I don’t know what my Bard experience
would have been like without her. And of course, Professor Alex Benson’s guidance has
been indispensible, and for Bard’s sake, he’d better get tenured.
I need to thank Charlotte for her support and wealth of knowledge on American
ecological history. I also have to thank the library staff for their advice and
recommendations, and my friends and family for tolerating me. Lastly, I don’t believe
that this project would have existed had it not been for beautifully paved Paris
immediately contrasted against the Bard Farm and its workers. It was truly a working
paradise, but perhaps only in retrospect…

Table of Contents
Introduction
1
Chapter I
The Cloud and the Shepherd
5
Chapter II
Industry and the Caged Animal
31
Chapter III
True Human Nature, in Nature
49
Conclusion
71

1

Introduction
When we speak of Nature it is wrong to forget that we
are ourselves a part of Nature. We ought to view
ourselves with the same curiosity and openness with
which we study a tree, the sky or a thought, because we
too are linked to the entire universe.
Henri Matisse

It’s six a.m., and the sun shining through his cottage window tells him that it’s
time to take his herd out to pasture. He clothes himself and once again decides to spurn
his sandals, preferring the touch of grass to the little protection the extra layer will afford
him. Stepping outside, he relishes the cool earth and the sun shining through the trees and
breathes deeply. The shepherd doesn’t consider his life’s work harshly won, nor does he
desire greater acknowledgement for tending to his flock: his work is his life, and his
sheep are just as much a part of him as the stream running gently behind his house and
the trees that the fresh water nourishes. And like the stream, the shepherd moves through
his environment calmly and contented, his only concern being preparation for the
oncoming winter. However, he knows he need not worry much, for among his neighbors
and countrymen he has never gone hungry.
This is merely a glimpse into the pastoral paradise envisioned by William
Wordsworth (1770 – 1850) in his romanticized reminisces of a pre-industrial world. But
perhaps it was not merely pre-industrial. In this piece I hope to argue that the shepherd
and the “working paradise” ideal, unified by many of Wordsworth’s poems and so loved

2
by him did not just evaporate from the earth with the rise of industry. In order to do so I
trace the shepherd’s existence and appearances through three separate countries at three
different periods of time around the rise and wide implementation of industrialized
economies.
The first chapter deals with the rise and necessity of a romanticized past that is so
heavily occupied with the idea of human interaction with “nature,” beginning around the
start of the industrial revolution. Through a study of enlightenment thinkers and preromantic philosophers such as John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau I attempt to locate
the origins of Wordsworth’s shepherd, otherwise known as his “working paradise” ideal,
and I attempt to understand why the idea of “nature,” while generally separated from
ideas of humanity, is an absolute necessity in Wordsworth’s paradise.
The second chapter is an exploration of a few of the important ideas that shaped
Émile Zola’s (1840 – 1902) vision of a mechanized world in the midst of the industrial
revolution. The world of The Beast Within (1890) displays a ravaged French landscape
with very few traces of anything perceptibly “natural” as Wordsworth would define it.
However, with the rise of Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, what’s “natural” is once
again thrust upon human beings, or rather coaxed out. Man, in this landscape lacking any
of the “natural” wonders so loved by Wordsworth, reverts to a bestial and barbaric state
contrary to anything one could expect from a civilized society. The “working paradise,”
as imagined by Wordsworth, is virtually nonexistent in Zola’s novel. With morality
unknown and pollution abound, the shepherd is obscured and unknown, and as a result it
seems that there’s not much hope left for human beings.

3
The third and final chapter tracks the reemergence of Wordsworth’s ideal in the
United States, long after its industry been established. Using John Steinbeck’s (1902 –
1968) novel Cannery Row (1945), I attempt to explain how Steinbeck reimagined the
shepherd of Wordsworth’s working paradise, and explore how exactly such an idea could
find, or perhaps make itself a new niche in a rusting, bent up world.
The three radically different authors that I chose are each singularly important
when attempting the understand this impact of industry: each from different times,
countries, and backgrounds, their lives forming a solid timeline from around the start of
the industrial revolution to long afterwards, each author with different experiences in
regards to industry and the natural world around them. Through a reading of
Wordsworth’s poetry on the beauty of nature, I hope to better understand the beasts that
emerge in Zola’s flowerless world, and the unremitting and unrelenting beauty of
Steinbeck’s well-established industrial world, despite the rust and despite the constant
frustration.

4

5

Chapter I
The Cloud and the Shepherd:
A Brief Background and the Romantic Poets
The romantic period of poetry and writing can scarcely be pinned to a single
definition if only because of its vastness, but understanding its roots can help to
understand why certain authors were so obsessed with certain things, such as nature.
Romanticism sprouted around the time of the industrial revolution, around the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth century, and was at least partially the result of a slowly
mechanizing workforce and the move to cities. In this chapter I’ll be exploring how
exactly the pre-romantic ideals of the enlightenment that deal with ideas of work and
land, heavily resting in the minds of a disillusioned mass of people that, in an
industrializing society, would be living in heavily polluted cities gave rise to a movement
of poets such as William Wordsworth. These poets, yearning for a time quickly fading
from living memory, reimagined what it meant to work for nobody but oneself in a
pastoral countryside.
I’ll be starting with the father of the romantics, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and his
Discourse on the Origins and Foundations of the Inequalities Among Men, in which he
uses his reasoned imagination to reach as far back as he possibly can to the earliest forms
of civilization in order to understand human beings as creatures, and from that point
begin to understand how homo sapiens have found themselves decidedly separate from
nature.

6
Rousseau begins his Discourse by entering a thorough exploration of his
imagined beginnings of human society, speculating upon the “savage” nature of mankind
before civilization through a systematic examination of the numerous characteristics that
set men apart from beasts, and how one can easily find man’s place among them.
Looking at “savage man”, (i.e., pre-civilized man) Rousseau finds a creature physically
weak but intelligent and self-aware, writing: "men, dispersed among animals, observe
and imitate their industry, and thereby develop in themselves the instinct of the beasts;
with the advantage that whereas each species has only its own proper instincts, man–
perhaps having none of his own…" (Rousseau 105) According to Rousseau, every human
action is done with instinct imitated rather than innate: through learned tactics, either by
spending time watching animals, or learning from his own mistakes or those of his peers.
Rousseau, looking inwardly at his own ability to reason, assumes that nothing that he
does is merely instinctual but is reasoned fully: something greatly different than the
mechanical actions of the natural world. Rousseau’s image of the savage man continues
with the belief that there are profound differences between mankind and beasts. This is
just one of the numerous romantic idealizations set upon ideal man in order to broaden
the alleged gap between mankind as a species from the other creatures of the world: a
chasm that is shrinking at an alarming rate in Rousseau’s time and onward.
However flawed, contextualizing this reasoning allows us to view man as being
separate from beasts only through his ability to do things that can be planned and
calculated, and he can change himself to fit his environment. As Rousseau writes: man
has “the faculty of self-perfection.” (Rousseau 114) The means of self-perfection––at
least before the spark of civilization set the gears of artificial means of production to

7
move across the earth––lay simply in watching other animals hunt and interact with their
surroundings, and eventually, human beings would watch and learn how the plant yields
its fruits, and its fruits contain seeds, which can then be manipulated to produce as much
nourishment as land can physically maintain.
With this in mind, Rousseau argues that man did not merely find a means of
producing vast amounts of food without hunting, but something much more important
when one is searching for the reasons for inequality among men: property. When one
man sows seed, in order to make sure his work was not in vain, he puts up fences and
claims the land as his own domain. Then, knowing full well that a fence means absolutely
nothing to a “savage man”, many of these self-proclaimed property-possessing men band
together with mutual interest in the legitimacy of their fences, and these men came to be
known as kings, lords, and governments. Eventually, these men called themselves the
commonwealth and created law to keep human beings––and their soil––safe from the
wandering hands of other human beings, those they would call “savage man”, or he
without law. When this happened, according to Jean-Jacques Rousseau, “nature was
subjected to law.” (Rousseau 102) Nature, biblically believed to be possessed by all of
mankind uniformly and without boundaries (that is, if one traces back the lineage of
mankind’s land ownership to the Garden of Eden) is now divided amongst those who
stuck their fence posts into the ground first.
If property in order to protect one’s fruits of labor plays such a vital role in
separating the “civilized man” from the “savage man,” then it’s not a stretch to say that
work is precisely what Rousseau imagines as the cause of the break between human
beings and the natural world. If one must have a sense of security over land in order to

8
utilize it to produce food, then ownership, or at least some form of ownership is what
allowed humans to create civilized societies.
It’s incredibly important to keep in mind that Rousseau prefaces this imagined
history of mankind as one of his “thought experiments”, and so even Rousseau thought it
was important to note that to know man’s nature before the advent of civilization is
entirely impossible, just as impossible as understanding how pre-civilized man
considered his surroundings: Rousseau is merely being speculative. Nonetheless, one
must consider the first subjugation of “nature” to mankind’s laws as the loss of its
“innocence:” in the scenario of the fence posts, for instance, the fence is all that it takes
for a plot of land to turn from wild and unbounded (literally) to become knowable,
bridled, and domesticated. No longer free and unattainable, now regulated, and in some
cases, even patrolled. Now the world has been split in two: this side of the fence, and
everywhere else.
Rousseau’s vision of the beginnings of property was a vivid reimagining of the
ideas postulated by philosopher John Locke (1632 – 1704), who, in his Second Treatise
of Government (1689) maintained that one can absolutely own land: he asserted that land
ownership can only happen when one works on and for the land he of which he claims
ownership:

Though the water running in the fountain be every
one’s, yet who can doubt but that in the pitches is his
only who drew it out? His labor has taken it out of the
hands of nature where it was common and belonged
equally to all her children, and has thereby appropriated
it to himself. (Locke 3.29)

9
As much as any one can make use of to any advantage
of life before it spoils, so much he may by his labor fix
a property in; whatever is beyond this is more than his
share and belongs to others. (Locke 3.31)

Locke firmly believes that not only is land ownership possible, but that it is a natural, and
therefore inalienable right for all of mankind. This is not so different from Rousseau’s
idea that one can own land based on the need to harvest that which one has set into the
soil: both philosophers believe that after working the land, one becomes entitled to the
claim of it. However, Locke is much more optimistic, and seems to suggest that work
must be done continually, while Rousseau asserts that only greed can come of such
practices.
Following Locke and Rousseau’s similar assertions, one must consider the fact
that because the idea of man’s ability to own land comes from the desire to be the
benefactor of the fruits of one’s labor, land ownership, at least at this first instance, is a
result of his territorialism, the origins of which can be easily traced back to the instinct of
animalistic self-preservation, and not merely a natural human right: after all, “what man
would be insane enough to torment himself cultivating a field that will be plundered by
the first comer, whether man or beast, for whom the crop is suitable? … In a word, how
could this situation inspire mankind to cultivate the earth as long as it is not divided
among them: that is to say, as long as the state of nature is not annihilated?” (Rousseau
119) Rousseau clearly believes that once property is established, the “state of nature” can
be no more. However, Rousseau’s ideas seem to contradict each other from a
contemporary perspective. How can man, in acting under animalistic self-preservation,
“annihilate the state of nature?”

10
Recall the definition Locke gives to the state of nature: “living according to
reason, without a common superior on earth, to judge between them, is properly the state
of nature.” (Locke 2.19) Between these two philosophers, it is difficult to reconcile the
idea that nature can exist while land ownership exists as well. Land ownership and
government implies the subjugation of nature to law, revoking its status as natural. Locke
seemingly resolves this conflict with himself by stating:

…at present that since all princes and rulers of independent
governments all through the world are in a state of nature, it is
plain the world never was, nor ever will be, without numbers of
men in that state. (Locke 2.14)

While believing that man is in a state of nature only when he is without law, Locke has
also written that man never was in a state of nature because superiors have always
existed, while also stating that man has never existed without a form of government, and
therefore he believes it natural for man to be ruled. How Locke found himself at the point
where he can properly assert that man has always and will always be subject to some law
or the will of another, and that this state is a state of nature goes beyond the “reason” that
he seems to consider himself beholden to.
We find between Locke and Rousseau two conflicting definitions of what can or
cannot be defined as “natural.” They are irreconcilable, at least on this point, and
therefore they must be kept separate. If we are to stay true to the timeline, the change that
Rousseau applied to Locke’s definition of “nature” merely applies a more developed idea
of reason, removing some of the seeming contradictions that are strewn throughout his
writings. This marks a shift in thought, or an evolution of human perception and self-

11
perception: the steady reassimilation of mankind from his self-assigned seat at the foot of
God’s throne, and through reason, perceptiveness, and some imagination, man is slowly
drifting from his long-held belief that he holds utter dominance over every aspect of the
natural world. Now, if greed and the desire to own the land is not natural, nor is it innate,
then it is indeed strange that it exists as a side effect of the apparently problematic issue
that is self-preservation.
If we are to follow Rousseau’s train of thought, the advent of greed is not so
curious a problem, and it certainly developed from man’s instincts. Rousseau marks the
ownership of property and the advent of greed as man’s departure from the “natural
world”, but Locke marks that departure with the application of laws beyond the “natural
law.” Following Rousseau’s imagined chronology of human development in which the
idea of human law comes from the belief in property, Locke’s assertion may mean
something quite different. Looking at man in this natural state, Locke sees him governed
by his version of natural law, or “life, liberty, and property.” (Locke 2. 4) Man, for
Locke, owned property in his natural state, despite the problems that arise within Locke’s
own philosophy when both rules are applied simultaneously. Regardless, Locke, only
speaking of natural rights and freedoms and he does not address greed, and it is therefore
difficult to find an appearance of greediness so clearly defined as Rousseau’s, so from
this point we will be chiefly dealing with Rousseau, as well as the fact that he allowed
himself to a wider imagination much more free of constraints outlined by the Bible,
allowing him much more freedom than Locke. That’s not to say that Locke’s visions
were entirely dependent on his beliefs, but rather that the culture in which he found
himself led him in a particular direction, one that held firmly to the idea that God and the

12
Bible were absolute truths, and therefore, the Bible was generally held as the basis of all
reason upon which philosophers, such as Locke, constructed their ideals and thought
processes.

When Rousseau speaks of the origins of human greediness, he addresses the fact
that human kind developed in a particular manner, one that made him suitable for
particular things:

Man has the advantage that, no less adept at running than they
and finding almost certain refuge in trees, he always has the
option of accepting or leaving the encounter and the choice of
flight or combat. Let us add that it does not appear that any
animal naturally makes war upon man except in the case of
self-defense or extreme hunger… (Rousseau 108)

Man is going to have a very hard time running from that which threatens his life when his
location is set and staked into the ground in the form of farming. Flight is no longer
possible if he must stand his ground over his stable way of growing his living. And
therefore, man has been obligated to find a new way of not only protecting himself, but
also a way of protecting his property which, for all intents and purposes, he often
considers a part of himself if he has worked for it, so goes those natural laws.
And the extra protection that one feels necessary, excluding weaponry which only
work on a small scale, is the creation of laws: agreements among men which entirely
stake human beings to the ground upon which they find themselves, for the sake of the
argument, “in their possession.” Of course, the spirit of adventure dwindles when man
finds himself in a society as such, and ideas of pre-civilization “freedom” tend to become

13
much more attractive, even if those brutish aspects of pre-civilized life never before
appealed to most humans. Mankind, without a reliable food source yearns for consistent
meals, and he who knows nothing else knows not the pain of hunger, but knows the
absent excitement from books or imagination. So when man found himself suddenly
outside of what he learned to regard as “nature” or “wilderness” by his ancestors’
volition, he began to yearn for what they had abandoned so long ago, when they made the
decision to adopt property, even if that abandonment of barbarism was for good reason.
Rousseau writes, “this sentiment must be the eulogy of your first ancestors, the criticism
of your contemporaries, and the dread of those who will have to live after you.”
(Rousseau 104) And yet the desire to return persists, and the negative aspects of living in
a dense forest, and to be entirely self-sustaining, without borders, are often overlooked.
Michael Wood explores the similar phenomenon of the “lost paradise,” and
though he does it through a Proustian lens, the rationalization applies nonetheless. Wood
explains that:

It’s not paradise until it’s lost; it’s paradise because it’s lost.
Loss is all there is. Or more precisely: absence or lack is what
there is, and culture after culture construes this sad state of
affairs as a story of loss. We haven’t got turns into we used to
have. The true paradises, indeed the only paradises, are the
ones we have always already lost, because loss is what they are
for, they have no other purpose than to be lost.
(Wood 7)

While Wood is talking about Proust, the message vaguely echoes Rousseau’s opinion on
man’s occasional desire to return to nature, and it much better explains the reason that
one would be attracted to the idea of that return. The difference is, while Wood explains

14
that a return is impossible, Rousseau is much more direct, saying that the return to nature
would be catastrophic, and would not at all fulfill those romantic desires of the one doing
the return, nor would it comfort his descendants, granted that their fathers could, of
course, survive in such a harsh environment without preparation or a firm hold on the
reality of their desires.
However skeptical he seems to be in his Discourse, Rousseau seems to be able to
foresee both the romantic idealization of nature, often seen in the work of poets such as
William Wordsworth and Victor Hugo, as well as the enormous shift in ideas on the
“natural” that Charles Darwin provides to humanity: so jarring indeed that many refuse to
believe it. Rousseau is the first of a relatively fast series of realizations in philosophy and
human reasoning, one that would examine and later challenge the long held belief that
man and nature are intrinsically separate and far from equal in value: man being created
by God and nature merely in order to serve the needs and desires of mankind. Rousseau
imagines man in his primal state, before civilization, though he is never entirely removed
from the creationist mode of thought. Using his reason and imagination, Rousseau begins
leveling human beings to a part of nature with similar tendencies to that of beasts, the
main difference outlined earlier, that man has no instinct but reason, equating instinct and
free will: and so he revered it, and based much of his thoughts and writings on its
workings. But for the romantics, who began to appear at least partially as a result of the
industrial revolution, using reason also meant that it was possible to be one with the
flowers and trees, and clouds, as well.
However, Rousseau’s lowering of man into the natural world is not one wholly
innocent of the assumption that man and nature are two radically different entities. In the

15
“Fifth Walk” of his Reveries of a Solitary Walker, Rousseau focuses heavily on the
experience of becoming one with nature, or realistically, the process of losing oneself
entirely, which implies that the human and the natural are incompatible: inevitably and
forever separate, unless one consumes the other. Recalling his time spent on the Île de la
Motte, Rousseau writes of his adoration of the world he found there, for the most part due
to the island’s beauty it gave Rousseau the ability “to lose [himself] altogether in the
charms of nature and to meditate in a silence unbroken by any sound other than that of
the cry of eagles, occasional birdsong, and the rumbling of streams cascading down the
mountains.” (Rousseau 49) His desire to “lose himself,” or be “one with nature” lies in
his understanding of the beauty of the nature world: that one cannot fully appreciate it
from the perspective of a self, because the ego will inevitably obscure natural beauty.

Wood’s discourse on the lost paradise rings true when we compare the catalysts
of the “romantic period” to those of the industrial revolution. Of course, there were many
thinkers, like Rousseau, whose ideas were precursors to the romantics as well as the rise
of industrialism, and whose writings would become much more popular in the mid
nineteenth century, in the midst of a great societal upheaval. One of these such
philosophers was Gilbert White, a eighteenth century ecologist priest whose writings on
the minute natural occurrences in his small village in rural England would enchant
romantics and biologists alike. By applying Wood’s thesis to many romantic tendencies,
including the need to have optimistic memories, it seems abundantly clear why the
romantics would be so enamored by country life. However, in order to describe this
phenomenon more fully, Donald Worster writes that once a large portion of people

16
moved to cities in order to work in factories, “never again would it be possible… to take
for granted a sense of permanence of stability.” (Worster 14) Despite the fact that the
“pastoral dream” may have never existed in truth, upon stepping into a world blackened
by industry and where children no longer roam fields but instead were confined to their
low-paying and dangerous factory jobs, people began to long for what they left behind
when they departed their farming villages in search of a better life.
We now know that that city life quickly turned out to be, quite ironically, much
darker and more lonely despite the fact that during the night, dim gas lamps illuminated
street corners, and tenement buildings had people living in smaller spaces with the
highest population density many of its inhabitants had ever seen. William Wordsworth
addresses this idea in his poem, “The Prelude.”

Above all, one thought
Baffled my understanding, how man lives
Even next-door neighbors, as we say, yet still
Strangers, and knew not each other’s names.
(“The Prelude.” Book VII. 117-120)

William Wordsworth had much trouble coming to terms with the irrationality of what
should have been the pinnacle of human rationalism: in cities, everything was created
around the idea that it would be optimized and direct, and yet many of the things people
once took for granted, such as friendly neighbors, had now disappeared even though they
now had more neighbors than ever before: cities, built upon rationalist ideals, were very
quickly becoming the antithesis of rationality. Wordsworth is very clearly critiquing the
living spaces of many of his contemporaries, and for the most part, his own living
situation as well. But the form of much of his poetry, this included, obeys a very rigid

17
form and structure, which is very classically English, of which the pastoral ideal is a vital
part. Alternatively, the manner in which Wordsworth implements this classic form is not
nearly as rigid as many of his precursors: within the confines of his lyrical structure, his
prose seem to flow over the edges, and he frequently goes out of meter and hardly obeys
the classically English rhyming pattern, or any rhyming pattern at all. The effect is that
the poem seems to remind one of an overflowing garden, ridden with weeds yet still
beautiful, but tragically so. This nods to another one of Wordsworth’s poems, “The
Ruined Cottage,” which I’ll talk about later in this chapter.
So we see that the pastoral ideal becomes desirable for romantic writers incredibly
often. From a twenty first century perspective, it may seem slightly ridiculous that
pastoralist and naturalistic ideals could overlap as heavily as they do for the romantics,
but more often than not, that breaching is not even noticed, and it’s quite possible that
there never seemed to be a separation between the pastoral countryside and nature until
much later, which is something I’ll explain later on. For the time being, it must be
acknowledged that “pastoral” and “natural” are quite synonymous for many of these
romantic writers: it seemed to merely mean anywhere that’s not a city, or wherever
industry had not yet taken hold.

The romantics turned their eyes to the natural world because they felt
disconnected from that beauty. Keeping in mind the nature of romanticism as imagined
retrospect outlined by Wood and Rousseau’s writings earlier in the chapter, one can be
sure that it’s human nature to yearn for that which cannot be attained. That desire for
what one sees as unreachable explains why the romantics felt it necessary to completely

18
assure themselves that not only was it possible to be one with the natural world, but that
through poetry, it could absolutely be done:

[little read writer and philosopher, William] Hazlitt suggests
that the word ‘poetry’ should not be confined to something
found only in books, contained in lines of ten syllables; rather,
poetry is ‘the universal language which the heart holds with
nature and itself’; further, ‘wherever there is a sense of beauty,
or power, or harmony, as in the motion of a wave of the sea, in
the growth of a flower that “spreads its sweet leaves to the air,
and dedicates its beauty to the sun,” – there is poetry, in its
birth’ In Romantic poetics, poetry is to be found not only in
language but in nature; it is not only a means of
communication between man and the natural world.
(Bate 17)

This idea sparked a movement of poets who sought to reunite with beauty. For famous
romantic poets such as Victor Hugo (1802 – 1885) and William Wordsworth (1770 –
1850), the occupation with nature had entirely to do with the beauty that it represented.
They wrote poetry in order to reconnect to nature, poetry being the only language
understood by both humans and nature. This allowed a perceived “communication”
between man and nature, yet there continues to be an enormous disjunction between the
two bodies, but the romantics sought to bridge that gap as best they could, perhaps not
seeing that the gap was the only reason they were able to fall in love with what they
perceived as the natural world in the first place.
However, for many of the romantic poets I’ll be referencing from here on, it must
be acknowledged that the gap between themselves and the natural world was virtually
nonexistent: they as poets could be one with nature through writing, and reading the

19
earth. Victor Hugo (1802 – 1885), in his book of poetry Les Contemplations (1856),
writes on this idea:

I was reading. What was I reading? Ah, that old severe book.
That eternal poem! –– The Bible? –– No, the earth!
Every morning, Plato, when the blue sky is reborn,
Read Homeric verse, and I the lettering of God’s flowers.
I spell the hedges, the twigs and weeds and streams;
No need of carrying books
For I have each of them beneath my feet!
(“Je Lisais, que Lisais-Je?” 1-7)

Through Victor Hugo at least, it’s clear how far we’ve come since John Locke in terms of
religiosity: his views of the world and nature do not reflect the Bible and its teachings,
but from reasoning and observant eyes examining (and reading) nature itself. And now
we’re not strictly limited to the Christian looking glass that defined those philosophies
outlined by Locke, and occasionally Rousseau as well. Though those philosophers
claimed to be governed by reason, the Bible was often present in many of their works.
Hugo, however, was clearly much less influenced by his religious past, and more
influenced by direct stimuli: i.e., what he could gather through his senses directly from
his surroundings. Between Locke and Hugo, religiosity and reason have slowly but
ineffably drifted from one another: they are no longer one, and so nature, in turn,
becomes the new voice of intelligence and reason for the romantics: it is what can be seen
and heard and gathered from ones surroundings, and it has been relatively unaffected and
unaltered by the hands of man.
It’s also important to note that Hugo is approaching his “reading of nature” as a
scholarly approach, though he is far from claiming that he doesn’t get enjoyment from his

20
studies. For Hugo, nature is to him as Homer is to Plato: he explains that the greatness
that he has reached is a result of the teachings of the natural world: that poetry can only
be learned from nature itself, for it is the language of nature. William Wordsworth was
also of this mind, except for him, "poetry [was] a means of emotional communication
between man and the natural world." (Bate 17) Between the two romantic poets,
everything that one could learn about being human could (and ought to be) learned from
one’s natural surroundings, giving little credit to human society as a whole: they had
moved on, and they believed that many of the undiscovered universal truths and comfort
could only be found in the natural.
The desire to “reunite” man and nature is problematic in and of itself, for the mere
acknowledgement of a gap is proof that such a gap exists. Ironic as it seems that man
would open up a gap through his attempt to close it, even in the time of Locke, when
people tended to avoid the open wilderness, they never believed that they were entirely
separate from it, but instead that it was the realm in which humanity has complete
control. In this vein, we discover some early “natural philosophers,” like Gilbert White
for instance, who in his book A Natural History of Selborne, published in 1789, (quite
before this idea was popular) looked upon the pastoral countryside of Selborne, Great
Britain as his own central locale of natural phenomena. Despite the fact that in this
contemporary age, it’s much more difficult to consider pastoral lands as “untouched”, for
they are made up of farms and houses among other products of human civilization, White
would argue quite differently. In his 1977 book Nature’s Economy, Donald Worster
outlines why White’s view of nature, while seemingly very limited today, made perfect
sense at the time:

21

One might argue that the equilibrium between man and nature
in Selborne required the remorseless elimination of all
creatures deemed unruly, useless, irregular, or hostile. And one
might find it hard to believe that a rigorous scientific
temperament could lie down alongside piety in such bucolic
pastures. There is truth in each of these charges… For White
himself there seems to have been no contradictions of
misgivings… Only in a modern consciousness could these
reconciliations seem superficial, false, or impossible.
(Worster 11)

For White, the idea of being “one” with nature, as the romantics seem to suggest, is as
alien a concept as being one with one’s own mother. White, while being heavily
fascinated with the natural cycle of the world, as well as being one of the first people to
observe the intricacies of an ecosystem, never commented on the destructiveness of
human habits, such as chopping down trees for firewood or plowing fields for farmland.
At the very least, White believed that mankind is a part of the natural cycle irrevocably,
and thus his actions could only be natural, or in the instinct of self-preservation. This is
an idea that would be adopted, possibly unwittingly, over fifty years later by romantic
poets such as William Wordsworth as part of his working paradise ideal.
The working paradise ideal as outlined by Wordsworth is an amalgamation of
enlightenment and post-enlightenment ideals of the writers Locke and Rousseau, as I’ve
explored, and likely at least partially inspired by the shepherd Corin of William
Shakespeare’s comedy As You Like It, who defines his idea of work and foreshadows
Wordsworth’s working paradise ideal when he says, “Sir, I am a true labourer. I earn that
I eat, eat that I wear; owe no man hate, envy no man’s happiness; glad of other men’s

22
good, content with my hard; and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and my
lambs suck.” (As You Like It, III. ii. 71 – 5, via Bate 26)
This kind of pastoral ideal would return to the thoughts of post-industrial thinkers
and writers, when the English-speaking world turned to White for reminders of how the
old world used to function before the great exodus from the countryside to cities caused
by the industry boom. Wordsworth, living in a city yet put off by “next-door neighbors,
as we say, yet still strangers”, would also rely heavily on the bucolic pastures and quaint
old cottages for much of his poetry. But like White, even in the romanticized countryside
and from the perspective of a romantic poet, the only kind of nature that one can live with
is nature that has been bridled and controlled in some way. In his poem “The Ruined
Cottage,” Wordsworth tells the story of a soldier’s mourning widow, whose mental state
declines with that of the cottage that she inhabits. That cottage, once beautifully curated
and lovely to behold, has fallen into a wretched state, with “knots of worthless stonecrop” (Wordsworth 368) and unprofitable bindweed” (Wordsworth 372). The words
“worthless” and “unprofitable” used as adjectives to describe the unyielding order of the
undesirable aspects of nature harks back to White, to whom human restraints placed upon
the natural cycle were in themselves, natural. And without which, we begin to see the
sublime aspects of the wilderness: a loss of comfort and control. The “working paradise”
that Wordsworth was relying upon when he returned to the pastoral field is easily lost
without any sort of strong maintenance.
For many of the romantics, (in this I’ll include White, for he was very clearly a
proto-romantic) the pastoral ideal signified man’s “natural state”, and thus the desire to
“return to nature” or the desire to learn from nature, as Hugo would propose, is merely an

23
escapist view of industrialization. However, this escapist ideal only occasionally includes
other people: the desire to return to nature is, realistically, just a desire to return to a more
stable environment with friendly neighbors. Perhaps, for the romantic writers, this is what
is considered man’s natural state: to live in small farming towns. Indeed, this image
seems an ideal combination of Locke and Rousseau’s imagined primordial man, yet postproperty. But the exact reason for their desire to return to the pastoral countryside had
also made a profound effect upon their worldviews, such as their distaste for property.
Rousseau, even before the advent of industrial society makes what would become a
typical romantic gesture against property during one of his solitary walks, writing,
“surrounded by such riches, how could one possibly keep a faithful record of them?”
(Rousseau 12) Rousseau makes a point of gesturing towards the uncountable richness of
his environment in order to explain the ways in which the grasping of property is futile in
such a situation.
While Rousseau is speaking of cataloguing the flowering plants and grasses near
his home, the fact that he refers to them as “riches” displays a new sort of awareness of
environment: richness comes from beauty, and one need not own it to appreciate it. In
fact, its abundance and unculpability is part of what makes it so beautiful. Wordsworth
held this same ideal, and in the last section in his Poems on the Naming of Places, first
published in his book Lyrical Ballads in 1800, he writes:

Our walk was far among the ancient trees:
There was no road, nor any woodman's path;
But a thick umbrage—checking the wild growth
Of weed and sapling, along soft green turf
Beneath the branches—of itself had made

24
A track, that brought us to a slip of lawn,
And a small bed of water in the woods.
All round this pool both flocks and herds might drink
On its firm margin, even as from a well,
Or some stone-basin which the herdsman's hand
Had shaped for their refreshment; nor did sun,
Or wind from any quarter, ever come,
But as a blessing to this calm recess,
This glade of water and this one green field.
The spot was made by Nature for herself;
The travellers know it not, and 'twill remain
Unknown to them; but it is beautiful;
And if a man should plant his cottage near,
Should sleep beneath the shelter of its trees,
And blend its waters with his daily meal,
He would so love it, that in his death-hour
Its image would survive among his thoughts:
And therefore, my sweet Mary, this still Nook,
With all its beeches, we have named from You!
(“V. to M.H.” from “On the Naming of Places.” 1-24)

The first few lines of the poem recall a far secluded area of a forest, without a path and
yet an “umbrage,” or shadow from the trees allows the ground to be mostly clear of
weeds. It’s a natural path, and human kind need not blaze a trail of any kind. It is the
perfect image of a wooded walking-trail from a pastoral countryside, and yet “the spot
was made by Nature for herself;/The travellers know it not, and ‘twill remain/unknown to
them.” Wordsworth, upon imagining one of the most beautiful places in all of nature,
both makes it freely accessible to people and asserts that such a thing would never—or
perhaps could never—happen. More interestingly, after his stating that the place contains
no “woodsman’s path” is his affirmation of human presence nonetheless: not explicitly,
however, but Wordsworth hints at human presence, at least a minor one, in saying “All
round this pool both flocks and herds might drink/On its firm margin, even as from a

25
well,/Or some stone-basin which the herdsman's hand/Had shaped for their refreshment.”
Somehow, this herdsman or shepherd exists outside of the standard human existence of a
traveller or woodsman, and is therefore able to water his herd in the place made “by
Nature for herself.” The placement of the shepherd in that sacred spot implies that he is
somehow more natural than those who have found themselves in different professions,
and that he is somehow better for it.
The hypothetical man that “plants his cottage near” later in the poem can
therefore only feasibly be that shepherd, for he seems to be the only one able to enter.
With the lines that follow, Wordsworth makes it abundantly clear that not only is he
somehow part of nature because of his occupation which allows him to enter, but his life
is wholly better for it: fulfilling and perhaps even enjoyable. Wordsworth postulates,
“Should he sleep beneath the shelter of its trees/and blend its waters with his daily
meal/he would so love it” and so on. This suggests that appreciation doesn’t come from
being accepted by an untouched natural heaven, but accepting it wholly as well, in turn.
He must literally allow his surroundings to become part of him, and only then will he be
contented.
Wordsworth believes he has found a way for man to become wholly part of
nature, if the previous passage is as telling as it seems. But why is the shepherd different
from the woodsman? Perhaps, for Wordsworth, the shepherd fits better into his notion of
a working paradise, and upon a wider reading of his poetry, it’s quite clear that
Wordsworth made the claim that the paradise of nature can be enjoyed much more when
one is working with it and for himself, which is reminiscent of Locke’s assertion that man
can only truly own land when he works it:

26

But lovelier far than this the paradise
Where I was reared, in Nature’s primitive gifts
Favored no less, and more to every sense
Delicious, seeing the sun and sky,
The elements, and seasons in their change,
Do find their dearest fellow-labourer there,
The heart of man; a district on all sides
The fragrance of breathing of humanity,
Man free, man working for himself, with choice
Of time, and place, and object.
(“The Prelude.” Book VIII. 144-53)

Wordsworth is detailing how working within the pastoral ideal is greater and more
fulfilling than simply a visitation, like Rousseau, or some kind of “nature tourist,” as if to
work within nature is allows post-property humans to be a part of it rather than merely an
observer. In this instance of Wordsworth’s poetry, the elements and the seasons labor
along with the laborer, as if they are working with a common goal: “Marx argued that
when we work for someone else we become alienated: ‘the worker related to the product
of his labour as to an alien object.’ But as the Author of Romantic Ecology, Jonathan
Bate points out: “Wordsworth’s shepherds are free, they work for themselves, they
represent the spirit of unalienated labour.” (Bate 22) Bate then goes on to point out that
Wordsworth’s paradise is very different from that which we lost when we left the Garden
of Eden, and this is because we are working in tandem with nature, rather than it working
for us. Work plays a vital role in Wordsworth’s paradise ideal, and this harks back to
some of Gilbert White’s ideas, or rather lack of consideration that man destroys nature by
existing within it, and utilizing it for his own good, at least not to the extent that the

27
industrialists would: blackening the sky and polluting the air with smoke from their
factories, obscuring Wordsworth’s working paradise.
Not to say that the shepherd lived a perfectly ideal life, far from it. Speaking of
Alexander Pope, another romantic poet in the realm of Wordsworth: “the art of pastoral
lay ‘in exposing the best side only of a shepherd’s life, and in concealing its miseries.’”
(Bate 26) But for Wordsworth, “paradise” only existed in relation to the new standard of
the cities: it was entirely relative, and not “paradise” in the sense of Eden whatsoever.
Wordsworth doesn’t write for a perfect ideal, but takes more from the shepherd Corin of
William Shakespeare’s comedy As You Like It, as I’ve explained earlier in the chapter.
Paradise isn’t a workless, easy life, but rather just a life and living that one can exist and
work for oneself and be satisfied. The “working paradise” exists because of the thankless,
low-paying jobs in cities that many people found when they left their farming
communities during the industrial revolution. That reality had disappeared, and only now
that such a return is impossible is it suddenly so desirable. That’s not to say that romantic
idealists are merely dreamers, but rather to show how Wood’s theory holds some truth,
even when the drop in quality is quite real: paradise can exist, but only in hindsight, and
not merely in one’s imagination.
Now it’s somewhat possible that Wood’s theory of paradise applies less to those
like Wordsworth, but it would be quite difficult to separate the industrially inspired move
to cities from the countryside from the desire for the return. The rise of industry, in some
way, also turned the natural, meaning natural resources into a commodity in such a way
that had never been seen on earth prior: with the rise of factories, the main limiting factor
in expansion is the scarcity of natural resources. At this point more than ever before is

28
property an issue: owning land in order to maintain that land in a working paradise is one
thing, but now the land is being visually exploited on such a grand scale, and for the
benefit of so few at the expense of Hugo’s teacher: the Earth. At one point, working all
hours of the day (as in Wordsworth’s working paradise) meant one could actually survive
and thrive, not to mention be content in the work he was doing. The industrial worker, for
all intents and purposes, has been alienated from his environment and the people in it: he
cannot be like the shepherd of Wordsworth’s working paradise, being self-fulfilling and
working only for himself and nature, and yet he is confined to a small apartment,
reserved to live without real neighbors.
Privatization for the sake of industry bothered Wordsworth greatly, which is why
he turned his gaze to the things he did:

Governments may legislate about what we emit into the
air, and in that sense the constitution of nature is
determined by government and industry, but we cannot
parcel out the air as we parcel out the land. And water
can only be privatized in a limited sense. The particles
of water which form clouds — and we need no
reminding of how important clouds were to
Wordsworth, cannot be possessed or sold.
(Bate 19)

Therefore, the reason that Wordsworth found nature, hard work, and the pastoral ideal so
important was because he felt that in an industrialized world, many people had lost sight
of the beauty that they once beheld. And now, with that in memory (for Wordsworth)
rather than a daily normality, it has become an imperfect ideal, rather than the dystopian
world into which they relocated.

29
The romantic era, or the looking back to a natural ideal came into fruition because
of the radical shift from pastoral life to industrialized city life, and with that old life still
in memory, it’s quite easy to imagine that the return to a more pastoral state would be
desirable. For many romantics, it’s obvious that the change was more than a bit
disturbing, especially with the past so closely in memory. Of course, as with most
changes as drastic as industrialization it would soon be forgotten what it was like, as
William Wordsworth would have put it, to be human in a self-fulfilling and constructive
manner: that is, within a natural environment, working for oneself and for the world
around him. When the change is fully implemented and most people no longer remember
what it was like to live a life like the idyllic shepherd of Wordsworth’s working paradise,
then we will see a stunning realization and a end to the era of romantic literature: the
animal in man will return, and he will once again be part of nature, but not at all in the
sense that would be as wondrous as the romantics would have liked.

30

31

Chapter II
Industry and the Caged Animal:
Zola’s Rediscovery of Man as the Beast, the Lost Shepherd
In the middle of the nineteenth century, Charles Darwin published a book that
would go on to change the fundamental ways in which man viewed the world around
him, and by extension how he lived within it and won his livelihood. This book would be
called The Origin of Species, released in 1859, and with it Darwin sought to outline the
ways that organisms adapt to their environments by means of gradual mutation, and
furthermore how those organisms find and keep their niche in their respective
ecosystems. One could no longer assert that nature and its organisms have always
remained static since they were placed upon this Earth, and the idea of a “natural state,”
as explored by philosophers such as Rousseau lost much of its meaning, because in a an
ever-changing and ever-evolving world, how could one locate a “beginning?”
It’s plain to see why Darwin’s assertions on evolution by natural selection were
not immediately adopted over the previously held notions of creationism and even
Lamarckian theories1 of evolution: the ideas were incredibly complex, and proving that
organisms can change over thousands (hundreds of thousands) of years is something not
easily accomplished. The span of time that evolution requires to make real change to an
1

Jean-Baptiste Lamarck postulated one of the early theories of evolution, the idea that
environment gives rise to change within organisms, however the means in which this
happened was very different from Darwin’s theory. Whereas Darwin’s theory was
complex and needed thousands of years before significant change occurred, Lamarckian
theory suggested that such change could occur within a generation, meaning organisms
could improve themselves directly.

32
organism is so immense that it was difficult to imagine. So even when other biologists
and evolutionary theorists gradually came to accept Darwinian evolution as scientific
fact, many people sought to simplify the idea in order to better understand the scientific
breakthrough, and in so doing searched for evidence in the world immediately around
them, on a microscopic level. This search for explanation led many people to a vastly
oversimplified understanding of the complex theories and ideas set forth by Darwin,
exacerbated by the fact that many people lived for much of their lives in the cities devoid
of much more than human life and habitation.
Darwin’s theories challenged every enlightenment ideal that concerned human
nature, and the place of humans in the world for all of living memory. Suddenly, the new
scientific fact helped bring on the realization that humans and animals were one and the
same, and that man must, therefore, be merely another animal in his own self-made
environment: the city.
Further, the fact that people found themselves in cities had mostly to do with the
industrial boom, which was simultaneously pushing humanity forward and forcing a
reconsideration of the place of man in the animal kingdom and further, human nature. All
this at the same time that cities existed on a larger scale and people lived in closer
quarters than the world had ever before seen. The human world had suddenly shrunk
from the pastoral countryside of old to cities as people moved in order to find work, only
to discover that perhaps paying jobs were not as abundant as they had previously hoped.
Buildings, side by side left the horizon generally invisible, and so their worlds shrunk and
the fight for survival returned in the form of grueling searched for paying work.

33
Now, the metaphorical jungles that human beings once were so sure that they had
left ages before reappeared: but rather than trees and predators lurking in the foliage, they
saw solid rows of tenements, smokestacks, and other people fighting for survival in the
harsh climate of the city. In moving from villages to cities, communities of friends and
neighbors were exchanged for foes and challengers, and the atmosphere, as we will see in
Émile Zola’s novel The Beast Within, caused people to begin to consider the idea that
every person sought to usurp them and rob them of their hold, and everything they had
worked for. Everybody must be the enemy.
Theories of the evolution of man as a beast separate from other beasts such as the
one described above surely existed, and were not always entirely scientifically
unfounded. In his essay ‘The Golden Fly': Darwinism and Degeneration in Émile Zola's
Nana, Stephen McLean details the scientific thinking of the time, and how it often
conformed with these ideas of a world without sympathy:

Though initially reconciled with Victorian ideas
of progress, Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution
provided considerable impetus for notions of
degeneration. In Degeneration: A Chapter in
Darwinism (1880), the zoologist Ray Lankester
emphasized the importance of degeneration in natural
selection and even speculated on the decline of
European civilization. Darwin himself uncovered the
continuity between humans and animals, suggesting the
capacity for homo sapiens to revert to its bestial origins.
(McLean 62)

Charles Darwin himself hinted that man was fully capable of once again becoming a
beast, although it’s important to note McLean’s use of the word “revert,” meaning that

34
the belief was that Charles Darwin, despite his hand in the spark that set the beastly man
theory ablaze during the naturalism movement, believed that man had indeed progressed
beyond the animalistic nature of other beasts, despite their similar origins. However, the
fact that man was an animal had already sunk in to the minds of many naturalist writers
such as Émile Zola, and the relentless scientific approach to understanding human nature,
in all its darkness and negativity, would be the louder voice. And that man had the
capacity to return to his early state, “of nature,” was much more obvious as a result of the
incredibly negative effects of industrialization, and so man as beast became the harsh
truth that the naturalist writers faced.
This is the world as seen by Émile Zola, and in his novel The Beast Within,
published in 1890, he describes an exceedingly difficult terrain with many of his
characters exemplifying the animalistic lack of reason or compassion that occurred as a
result of self-interest. The same will to survive recognized by Darwin as one of the
numerous factors of evolutionary processes. The main character of Zola’s novel is
Jacques, a train engineer and driver, and as we follow his life during the late nineteenth
century (and not necessarily from his point of view), we develop a deep understanding of
that world, and though constricted by our own inability to sympathize with actions
committed without any reasoning or much thought, we find a very interesting (and
disturbing) viewpoint of the state of affairs during that time period.
The economic tidal shift from farming in the pastoral countryside to steel working
factories in cities, for Zola, seems to have caused the introduction of a new kind of beast
to the landscape of France: something that industry could not exist without, and a new
opportunity for movement and the new, industrialized livelihood of the people:

35

The railway was like a giant creature, a colossus that
lay sprawled across the country, its head in Paris, its
backbone stretching the length of the main line, its arms
and legs spreading out sideways along the branch lines
and its hands and feet at Le Havre and at other towns it
found its way to. On and on it went, soulless,
triumphant, striding towards the future, straight as a die,
willfully disregarding whatever shreds of humanity
survived on either sides of it, hidden from view yet still
clinging to their own hardy inner lives, their ceaseless
round of passion and crime. (Zola 48)

The railway very clearly revolutionized industry and the way the world works, while
industry made the railway possible. The two beasts fed off of one other, and were (and
are) inexorably connected, so they could very well be considered one and the same. And
Zola makes it abundantly clear how brooding of a presence that industry and its cold
winding backbone make on the countryside and how it affects every creature in all of
France to which it has sprawled its limbs. That the railway is a creature puts it on the
same plane as human beings, prone to the same unreason and violent outbursts. And if it
is a creature, it’s like nothing the world has ever seen, and where, according to Darwin,
organisms must have a niche in their environment to survive, this is something entirely
different. Rather than being confined to a niche, the railway is sprawling over the entire
landscape, spread flat like a fire blanket and extinguishing the life that lay beneath it, like
the garden at the house at La Croix-de-Maufras, “which is cut in two by the railway line.”
(Zola 37) The fact that Zola has the train running through the center of a garden rather
than splitting something like a forest in two is significant in that it displays how little
control common people have over this new monster. While something “natural,”

36
normally signifies “the other,” or the one countering humanity in its fight for dominance,
then it’s significant that the rail has so little appreciation for things like gardens, which
are traditionally seen in a context of domestic beauty. The railway is an animal in its own
way, and not beholden to humanity.
Gardens were also incredibly important to poets like William Wordsworth, as we’ve seen
in the previous chapter, and in his poem The Ruined Cottage the garden is a symbol of a
stable pastoral livelihood and a happy home. Split in two, the railway’s intentions
disregard such beauty.
The garden and the “shreds of humanity” that “survived on either sides of it”
seem to be very closely related to one another. This seems to be a nod by Zola to the
romantics before him, before he furiously desecrates the old ideals of beauty in literature
and poetry. Human beings invented the locomotive in order to more efficiently transport
good and people and better serve the industry that allowed it to exist in the first place, and
though it did exactly what it was meant to do, it had little respect for humanity and its
morality. The idea that man is inherently greater than nature because of his ability to
reason, as explicated by Rousseau in my first chapter, has been discarded by the
invention itself. In this way, the locomotive has coaxed the beast back out of man, ergo
the title of the novel, The Beast Within.
Even Zola’s prose in this passage seem to obey a kind of steady clanging, with
short bursts of words forming simple phrases like a bell tolling. In the latter half of the
above passage, the phrases become shorter, simpler, a list of one word at a time that
simulates a more mechanical ticking, a repetitive production line, or even the knocking
sound of the wheels of a locomotive with the same processes being repeated over and

37
over, unceasing and unchanging. In fact, the words “soulless” and “triumphant” could
easily refer to the mode of work that a man or woman in a production line would
experience, especially when compared to earlier work: being reduced to a gear in a clock
and only focusing on one seemingly menial task, and never seeing the finished products
or the fruits of one’s labor.
But it seems that the final product, “the fruits one one’s labor,” bears little
importance to the humans of Zola’s world. They do menial tasks and live menial lives
“hidden from view yet still clinging to their own hardy inner lives, their ceaseless round
of passion and crime.” (Zola 48) This phrase has a sort of meter to it, and the effect is the
evocation of the poetry of the romantics, intentionally or not, that Zola sought to remove
from his contemporary societal consciousness because of its inability to tell solid,
difficult truths. Not only that, but the reversal is entirely plain: they no longer live
outwardly but inwardly, and they cling to the old ideals not of elevation or morality but
of reliance on subtlety, keeping their dark intentions and desires inside. The workers of
his day had moved into smaller spaces, committing their time to smaller tasks and so their
darker animalistic desires, as we see in Zola, had to be roped in in order to accommodate
the mechanical world they inhabited. But the pressure valve had been blocked and the
beasts within grow in strength beyond the capacity of their cages.
Zola’s world was a dark one, and it stands out in harsh contrast to the romantics
who wrote to blind themselves of the harsh world around them, those whose work pushed
Zola to write what he saw as scathingly truthful depictions of industrialized France.
Where many of the romantics immediately preceding his time turned their heads from the
sadness they found in everyday life, Zola plunged himself headfirst into the world as he

38
knew it in order to explore the vast changes that were taking place and their enormous
significance and implications. Following writers such as Lord Alfred Tennyson, who
wrote the King Arthur epic poem, The Idylls of the King, which detailed a lost time of
chivalric duty and courtly perfection, Zola’s writing served to explicate the precise
reasons for this escapism and yearning for the past, mainly the fact that the world was a
harsh, unforgiving place. The way that many of the romantics viewed it, there had been
an enormous degeneration of culture and human decency between the imaginary time
periods that Tennyson’s writing deals with and Zola’s blackened world, the world that
Zola would argue existed around them.
Where did this dreary view come from? Historically, the industrial revolution was
indeed a time of widespread pollution and poor workers’ rights. At the turn of the
twentieth century, an economic shift had taken place, and further upheaval was
happening at full speed and gaining momentum as industry replaced agriculture as the
work for the masses. Leo Tolstoy, in one of his nonfiction writings, The Slavery of Our
Times, published in 1900, writes extensively on the living conditions and the place of the
worker in this new factory setting:

There are English statistics showing that the
average life among people of the upper classes is fiftyfive years, and the average life among working people
in unhealthy occupations is twenty-nine years.
Knowing this (and we cannot help knowing it), we
who take advantage of labour that costs human lives
should one would think (unless we are beasts), not be
able to enjoy a moment’s peace. But the fact is that we
well-to-do people, liberals and humanitarians, very
sensitive to the sufferings not of people only, but also
of animals, unceasingly make use of such labour, and

39
try to become more and more rich–that is, to take more
and more advantage of such work. And we remain
perfectly tranquil.
(Tolstoy 18)

The economic shift from agriculture to factory fabrication could only benefit those who
were already massively successful, or those few that could afford to open up a factory.
While hopeful workers flocked to the cities, living stacked in tenements and suffering in
an extremely polluted environment, more people desired some form of escapism: so
many people yearned for the earth and soil, and the forests of the pastoral countryside of
their youth. Tolstoy believes that not only is the massive, unyielding expenditure of
human lives inhumane, but inhuman. He means to say that this new treatment of working
men had opened a door within human consciousness that every enlightenment thinker and
religious writer has fought so hard to bar shut: that human beings are once again allowing
themselves to be “beasts,” as if that is the only explanation for the working conditions of
the lower class. This sort of sentiment surged to life after lying dormant and hidden for so
many years, and Zola sought to capture and display that beast within man, because to
deny its life was to deny the truth of the world as it was.
The economic shift from agriculture to industry quickly began to change every
fundamental aspect of human life: not merely their livelihood, but the air they breathed
and the world they saw and knew. Everything appeared to have changed, and despite the
sad state of many manufacturing workers’ lives, and the clear decline in quality of life for
many of these workers, or perhaps as a way to justify it, there was a push to accept this
new way of life as natural, because with Darwin’s natural selection ideas in the social
consciousness, it was hardly possible to convincingly separate anything that mankind
does at all from the new concept of “natural.”

40

This wonderful blindness which befalls people of our
circle can only be explained by the fact that when
people behave badly they always invent a philosophy of
life which represents their bad actions to be not bad
actions at all, but merely results of unalterable laws
beyond their control. In former times such a view of life
was found in the theory that an inscrutable and
unalterable will of God existed which foreordained to
some men a humble position and hard work, and to
others an exalted position and the enjoyment of the
good things of life. (Tolstoy 23)

There could be no just or unjust in a natural world, and so through Charles Darwin’s
relatively new ideas on natural selection and evolution, the people who held the power to
steer the lives of working people had to first free themselves from the shackles of
humanity and morality in order to make maximum profit. What Tolstoy describes is
something that could be referred to as “social Darwinism,” or the application of the most
basic understanding of Charles Darwin’s theories of evolution, with emphasis almost
exclusively on the phrase “survival of the fittest.”
The concept of social “Darwinism” came about during a pivotal period in human
history: it was a time when more than ever the wealthy few were able to amass capital at
an unprecedented rate, while the working class struggled after working long hours. But as
a result of the newly developed means of manufacture (that is, the invention of
manufacturing plants), the process of hiring workers cheaply quickly became standard,
and because many of them became disillusioned because of their plight, it felt as if they
had been thrust back into the jungle, left to fight for themselves while their bosses thrived
and conquered.

41
The tenants of social Darwinism, as a rule, tend to create a bleak and violent
world, and this is something we become fully immersed in while reading naturalist
writers that sought to expose that world, and show its readers exactly how living in that
situation could be, such as Émile Zola. The Beast Within is a multi-layered canvas that
details a highly industrialized world, with hulking locomotives as the driving force
behind nearly every character’s violent actions. We’ve come to understand this vaguely
in the context of locomotives “disregarding whatever shreds of humanity survived on
either sides of [them,]” but throughout the novel we frequently get to witness the effects
on the decay of humanity. Because the novel is a murder mystery following both killers
and detectives, we witness both blind, reasonless murders and attempts to understand
them through broken logic. In her article entitled Zola and Monet, Marian S. Robinson
forms a brief synopsis of the murders rather well:

Each climactic episode of violence or lust is
inextricably bound up with the engine and the physical
presence of the railway. Of the violent deaths in the
novel—and the novel is among other things a
psychological study of crime and punishment—three
are directly connected with the train: the murder of
President Grandmorin, the suicide of Flore, and the
accidental death of Jacques. The fourth, the murder of
Séverine, is triggered by the roar of the passing train,
and the fifth is that of the engine La Lison herself.
(Robinson 65)

Zola’s novel suggests that the appearance of the railway not only coincided with the
bestial uprising in humans, but was a considerable factor in its awakening. Train lines
seem to have changed people profoundly, and the switch was a cause of vertigo that

42
caused people like Jacques to fall in love with machinery. Jacques specifically ends up
taking his locomotive as a sort of mistress, and unlike actual human beings, that train is
able to quell his animalistic behavior.

The only times he felt relaxed, happy and at ease with
the world were when he was driving his locomotive.
When he was being hurtled along at full speed, with his
ears ringing from the din of the wheels, with his hand
on the regulator and his eyes fixed on the line ahead
watching out for signals, his mind was at rest… This
was why he loved his locomotive as he did; it was like a
mistress, soothing him and bringing him only
happiness. (Zola 58 – 59)

Jacques’s has an obvious love affair with his work, in fact his work is the only
thing that enables him to be a relatively well-adjusted individual, at least compared to
who he would be without it, and gives him the ability and speak to other people.
However, it seems that the train has its own intentions, because it also causes him to
murderous rage. Zola’s use of the passive voice in Jacques’s movement, “being hurtled
along,” allow us to see quite clearly who controls who, and which of them has the power
in any given situation. He has allowed the locomotive to take his life utterly: he seems to
no longer have any control over his own fate, which, for the romantic poets and in
particular William Wordsworth’s “working paradise” ideal, would be considered the least
enjoyable thing possible, the antithesis of a fulfilling life. The shepherd has been lost.
Jacques, however, has little outside of his life as an engineer, and indeed, aside from his
incredibly violent outbursts that occasionally end in murder, he isn’t particularly like an
animal, or what we would call animalistic in contemporary terms. In the very least, he
doesn’t at all obey the cornerstones of Charles Darwin’s survival of the fittest ideal,

43
except in that he is almost constantly on the edge of killing another human being. Zola
might argue that though humans don’t consciously act in order to assert their own
dominance over others, it’s instinct rather than intention that defines beasts. Reversing
Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s idea that I outline in the previous chapter—where he defines
man as a creature with the ability to reason rather than act on instinct—Zola’s view
solidifies man as merely another animal. Like Charles Darwin before him, Zola believed
that man must be more like animals than previously thought, and therefore acting on
instinct to secure one’s place is much more likely. With Darwin’s theory clearly visible
among humans, man could no longer deny that he is an animal like any other, and
therefore he should no longer attempt to hide it. In his Experimental Novel (1881) Zola
details that it is now art’s duty to bring to full view of which we are now fully aware, but
would be more comfortable were they invisible:

I am waiting, finally, until the evolution accomplished
in the novel takes place on the stage; until they return to
the source of science and modern arts, to the study of
nature, to the anatomy of man, to the painting of life, in
an exact reproduction, more original and powerful than
anyone has so far dared to place upon boards.
(Zola 143)

While talking specifically of the theater in this passage, Zola is highlighting that what
naturalism has done for novels by writers such as himself have yet to be done on the
stage, and that it must be contemporized or it is doomed. But more importantly, this
passage does an excellent job of explaining the purpose of naturalism as a whole, and
more specifically Zola’s novels. The fact that Zola favors art as “a study of nature” and

44
“an exact reproduction” is particularly shocking when one takes into account just how
violent Zola’s novels can be, because that in turn shows us the world as he has witnessed
it: if his novels are a literal representation, then it is a truly harsh world.
Looking back to Zola’s The Beast Within, the main character Jacques’s actions
seem, at first glance, to coincide to social Darwinistic tendencies. As a result of
industrialization and in particular the locomotive he worships, Jacques has lost almost
every semblance of humanity and more resembles a feral beast than a human being. So
much so that someone such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau would either be forced to turn a
blind eye to such a horrid specimen and find another example for the vast difference
between man and beast, or he might be forced to reconsider his views of the nature of
man.
Jacques is hardly a pure beast, though, and he is at best self-destructive rather than
self-interested. One of the corner stones of Darwin’s theory of natural selection deals
with sexual selection, or the ability to reproduce in higher numbers, among many other
variables. More importantly, Jacques might be incredibly violent and that may have
labeled him as a beast, but animals must reproduce in order to succeed, and he seems to
be mostly repulsed by the idea. Faced with sexual intimacy with Flore, a person who can
only be called a nymph (when Jacques walks in on her, he remembers that she always
used to bathe in the river), Jacques does not act like any sort of animal, but rather as a
psychopath:

But he did not take her. He drew back, gasping for
breath, looking at her. He seemed to be possessed;
some wild impulse made him look around him for a
weapon, a stone, anything that he might use to kill her.
(Zola 55)

45

This is, at best, a horrible hybrid of multiple animalistic characteristics acting all at once,
in unison. On the verge of mating, Jacques reels back and has an overwhelming desire to
kill her, but instead he pulls himself together and runs off. This is contradictory to
Darwin’s ideas of self-preservation, and recall the idea of “degeneration” that I went over
much earlier in this piece. Jacques is hardly a sexual animal, but something else entirely.
He is a character whose breath resembles the steam of a locomotive: like the chugging of
a steam engine, Jacques is moving away from her with his eyes stuck as if on a track.
Jacques is a beast, but not an animal any more than a locomotive would be. Just prior to
the scene, Flore asks him: “is it true that the only thing you’re in love with is your
locomotive,” which, as we know, is an obvious truth, because for him, his train is as good
as a mistress.
She also points out that Jacques spends his time with his locomotive “polishing it
and making it look shiny,” (Zola 53) hinting simultaneously that Jacques treats his train
as a lover, and that he overworks himself. Max Nordeau, a contemporary of Zola’s
despite their distaste for one another explains in his piece on degeneracy the changes that
the industrial revolution brought about on the individual level, writing:

All these activities, however, even the simplest, involve
an effort of the nervous system and a wearing of the
tissue. Every line we read or write, every human face
we see, every conversation we carry on, every scene we
perceive through the window of the flying express, sets
in activity our sensory nerves and our brain centers.
Even the little shocks of railway travelling, not
perceived by consciousness, the perpetual noises, and
the various sights in the streets of a large town, our

46
suspense pending the sequel of progressing events, the
constant expectation of the newspaper, of the postman,
of the visitor, cost our brains wear and tear. In the last
fifty years the population of Europe has not doubled,
whereas the sum of its labors has increased tenfold, in
part even fifty-fold. Every civilized man furnishes, at
the present time, from five to twenty-five times as much
work as was demanded of him half a century ago.
(Nordau 39)

Nordau is explaining the way in which his idea of degeneration is taking place, and the
inevitability of the return of man to his beastly form. Jacques is merely a sick man
inflicted with the industrial disease, and has broken down as a result of the rapid change
that has taken place around him. He is a symbol of the heavily overworked industrial
man, and he even though Nordau goes on to detail how this will lead to the fall of
western civilization, his theories are ever-present in The Beast Within.
Though Jacques is not one of the unlucky masses who are forced to maintain
unfulfilling jobs on production lines in order to survive, and in fact he’s quite lucky in
that he loves his occupation, his mental state and actions that pervade the novel
exemplify the state of mind of the times. No longer hopeful romantics, writers such as
Émile Zola felt that they couldn’t delude themselves into believing that a bright outlook
was possible, and that literature had a social obligation to state the truth. This was the
truth that Zola witnessed daily in mechanized France: a country industrialized to further
stretch the divide between man and nature, which would backfire as a result of inhuman
work and thus dragging the savagery of the beast into what could have been a purely
human space. The city is not a utopia for Zola, but in years to come, as human beings
became accustomed to the mechanized world, the shreds of humanity that the

47
locomotives left behind would sprout and flourish in vacant lots and in back alleys, and
soon enough humanity would once again rise above the idea of a beast as a reasonless
creature, and become once more an animal of reason.

48

49

Chapter III
True Human Nature, in Nature:
John Steinbeck’s Compassionate Creatures and their Habitats
On the other side of the Atlantic and twelve years after Zola’s Beast Within was
published, John Steinbeck was born into the blackened world of the Industrial Age, and
having no memory of a time without mass production, and no thought of a time without
machines, “adapting” to the industrial-era lifestyle was no difficult feat. Born in Salinas,
California, incidentally the same year of Zola’s death in 1902, Steinbeck grew up in a
rural town with some of the world’s most fertile farmland, but through a simple reading
of many of his works, it’s quite apparent that he never believed that a machine, such as a
Model T Ford or a locomotive could be an evil thing, because they merely served human
interests, and so the hands in which those contrivances found themselves fully dictated
the purpose they would serve. A gun could feed a family or destroy one, and locomotives
allowed men, women, and children to move across the vast country that is the United
States, not merely obsessing lonely men to the point of insanity, driving them back to
their bestial origins and murderous rage.
For many people in the United States during the introduction of the steam engine,
it wasn’t understood that it would revolutionize industry. However, as early as its
introduction at the start of the industrial revolution,1 American philosophers such as
Thomas Jefferson began to theorize about how the new invention could revolutionize the

1

Generally placed between the mid eighteenth century and nineteenth century.

50
workforce, and reduce the amount of labor wasted on menial tasks. As Leo Marx puts it
in his 1964 book of literary criticism, The Machine in the Garden:

From Jefferson’s perspective, the machine is a token of
that liberation of the human spirit to be realized by the
young American Republic; the factory system, on the
other hand, is but feudal oppression in a slightly
modified form. Once the machine is removed from the
dark, crowded, grimy cities of Europe, he assumes that
it will blend harmoniously into the open countryside of
his native land. He envisages it turning millwheels,
moving ships up rivers, and, all in all, helping to
transform a wilderness into a society of the middle
landscape. At the bottom it is the intensity of his belief
in the land, as a locus of both economic and moral
value, which prevents him from seeing what the
machine portends for America. (Marx 150)

Jefferson saw none of the evil that could come of such an invention, and in line with his
extremely positive belief that well-informed citizens would make the best possible
decisions, he held an overwhelmingly optimistic view of just exactly how such
equipment would revolutionize the workforce. And the fact that Jefferson “assumes that
it will blend harmoniously into the open countryside of his native land” seems to suggest
that he believed that something like the steam engine could be no different from a tent:
it’s merely a means to an end, and its use could be incredibly advantageous. Jefferson
seems to believe that morality derived from the land will be a driving force in both
pushing forward and ensuring that the scenes from Zola’s dreary world will never
happen. But, as we know, Jefferson never lived to see the world as Zola did, and died
before industry could wreak that havoc on the poor of the United States, despite his belief
in the morality of the land.

51
This belief that land will ensure American morality in terms of the use of
machinery can’t be considered merely of Thomas Jefferson’s mind, nor his time: land,
being incredibly important to the American consciousness, likely in part due to the vast
amount of it, sets the United States apart from the countries I’ve discussed in previous
chapters: France and Great Britain. The context of the United States vast land reserves
gave the citizenry the ability to claim huge portions of land to work: Rousseau and
Paine’s belief that land ownership would inevitably lead to people fighting for a stake in
the ground, which I went over in the first chapter, perhaps would no longer be applicable
in this new, vast untouched land. Morality could take hold because human beings did no
have to fight each other to earn a living. If that’s true, then machinery could help each
human being in their own realms, morally stable and allowing workers more time to think
rather than merely working oneself into the ground.
Of course, it’s plain that automation never did fulfill the fantasies of philosophers
like Thomas Jefferson, and although it did revolutionize the workforce, it did so in a
profoundly morally void fashion, causing writers like Emile Zola to quickly abandon the
idealized image of a fulfilling life comparable to the “working paradise” detailed by the
poet William Wordsworth. By Steinbeck’s time, as a direct result of the industrial
revolution (or more specifically the machinery that drastically reduced the cost of labor),
hopes of finding contentment in ones work shifted into necessity: or how much exactly
one must toil in order to gain a living wage. And, on the American side of the Atlantic
some writers borrowed from—or perhaps grew into—the ideas of founding fathers such
as Jefferson, whether accidentally or purposely. Because many of Thomas Jefferson’s
ideas on the natural state of humanity were either inspired by the land or directly

52
influenced the beliefs of the American populace, contentment in work through industry
became a hopeful part of the American consciousness. For John Steinbeck specifically,
this meant writing about travellers and bums, farmers working too much and receiving
too little, and hobos doing work where work was needed, but only when necessary. The
protagonists of Steinbeck’s novels are of the masses that can no longer afford to live and
survive by merely tending to their crops: they are ejected from the workforce, for the
most part wholly against their will because their work does afford them security and
contentment. They find food when and where they can, and in a way, try to live as
contently as possible given their circumstances.
Steinbeck’s protagonists reflect the American tradition as exemplified by that
Jeffersonian ideal in that they tend to approach machinery—such as broken down ModelTs and boilers—in a fashion not dissimilar from the way that the romantics would
approach a piece of natural beauty: by communicating with it directly. Machinery in
Steinbeck’s novels stand out in harsh contrast against their representations in Emile
Zola’s novel The Beast Within, where they’re presented as horrid monsters sucking the
humanity out of the land bit by bit. Perhaps they’ve merely had time to assimilate into the
environment, but in any case it’d be difficult to make the claim that objects of industry
maintain the same sort of evil, plotting sentiment for Steinbeck as they have for Zola. In
fact, for Steinbeck they’ve blended into the scenery in a way that the other writers I’ve
discussed earlier couldn’t imagine possible: when human beings and nature are
profoundly different and separated, how can man’s production be categorized as
"natural?" And yet for Steinbeck’s characters, the connection is as spiritual as
Wordsworth’s connection to the beauty of the "natural" world.

53
The Beast Within detailed how the industrial-era machinery had the ability to
completely overwhelm the workers and people of the time because the newly introduced
machinery changed their lives in a way that was inescapable, shockingly fast and
unceasing: the gears would spin, and the mechanic would chase it around and oil it, to
make it run more efficiently and effectively, only exacerbating the work he must do to
keep it running. This sort of machinery would indeed revolutionize the workforce and
reduce the demand for labor, consolidating numerous jobs into one that one would
contain the stresses and duties of every worker wrapped in a tidy package. However, it
would present itself as a deceptively simple list of tasks and maintenance that would
somehow cause people such as the main character of Zola’s novel to completely lose his
humanity, eventually reverting back to a kind of bestial state without a grain of
compassion left in him, as I’ve outlined in the previous chapter.
The first step to contentment, therefore, would logically be to abandon machinery
and the progress, as Thomas Jefferson would define it, that industrialization did offer,
which effectively set people backwards in development of both humanity and morality,
and what exactly set human beings apart from everything else, such as we’ve seen in
Zola. If technology’s only use was its ability to act as a catalyst in the dehumanization of
society, deconstruction of that vein of industrialization would be the only real option.
However, as the twentieth century American naturalist Aldo Leopold explains in his
exploration of the utility and morality of modern conveniences: occasionally machinery
can sometimes help us focus on nature rather than having to deal with utilities. To do so,
he cites two well-known American naturalists and conservationists who were actively

54
slowing the development of natural resources, but did so despite their use of modern
tools:
Roosevelt did not disdain the modern rifle; White used
freely the aluminum pot, the silk tent, dehydrated foods.
Somehow they used mechanical aids, in moderation,
without being used by them. (Leopold 181)

It’s apparent from this perspective that the use of “mechanical aids,” as Leopold puts it,
are not merely corrupting agents. From this, we can draw that perhaps this harmony
between industry and nature is not only possible without descending into an industrialtype madness as we’ve seen previously in Zola, but that moderate use of these tools can
allow human beings to better enjoy nature, so long as there isn’t any sort of fixation on
material objects.
By Leopold’s time, the world had already seen this fixation growing at an
unprecedented rate, as clearly displayed by Zola’s Jacques and his wicked attachment to
his locomotive. So Steinbeck sought a compromise: through a reading of his novels we
can see a vague rejection of the desire to return to the romantic idea of the shepherd, but
because movement to a less technologically advanced age is both impossible, and as I’ve
said in the first chapter, Rousseau believed that such a return could only be for the worst.
Rather, Steinbeck sought his own version of a “working paradise,” perhaps as a result of
the Great Depression, and the great loss of jobs that it caused, and the image of the
homeless vagabond or the migratory worker took the place of a contented shepherd.
These hobos were people who were generally forcibly removed from their homes for
some reason or another likely linked to the stock market collapse, or more likely the Dust
Bowl of the twenties, and by living in Steinbeck’s version of a “working paradise,”

55
develop a bond with the earth and their countrymen in different fashion than we’ve seen
in Wordsworth. However, he breaks on a vital point: Steinbeck’s compromise must
incorporate machinery, and does so by blending it into the contemporary landscape just
like Jefferson fantasized nearly two hundred years earlier.
This concept of machinery “blending into the landscape” is something that
Steinbeck does extensively, and more often than not it’s used in order to illustrate the
beauty of becoming one with the land through something as simple as losing one’s job—
and the same goes for machinery. For instance, in Cannery Row, Steinbeck’s novel
published in 1945 about the characters of a Great Depression-era industrial town, there is
a brief chapter about a man and wife who, after losing work, are evicted from their home
and find a new one in an old, disposed boiler left in a vacant lot:

The boiler looked like an old fashioned locomotive
without wheels… Gradually it became red and soft with
rust and gradually the mallow weeds grew up around it
and the flaking rust fed the weeds. Flowering myrtle
crept up its sides and the wild anise perfumed the air
about it. Then someone threw out a datura root and the
thick fleshy tree grew up and the great white bells hung
down over the boiler door and at night the flowers
smelled of love and excitement… In 1935 Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Malloy moved into the boiler. The tubing was all
gone now and it was a roomy, dry, and safe
apartment… you couldn’t want a dryer, warmer place
to stay. (Steinbeck 48 – 49)

The boiler is an old, used and discarded piece of equipment left to rust in a lot by some
factory owner. Firstly, the comparison that Steinbeck makes to an “old fashioned
locomotive,” in the context of this argument, is quite remarkable because it is reminiscent

56
of Zola, wherein the locomotive was partially symbolic of the workman’s descent into
animalistic madness and murder, as well as being a vital part of the new environment.
But here, discarded and rendered useless by deconstruction, “without wheels,” it’s a safe
space for a couple removed from their home as a result of joblessness. They are without
any great income, and yet they are content.
However, the most striking characteristic of the metallic mass is its relationship to
its environment: while a product of the industrial revolution, it’s able to become part of
an ecosystem rather quickly, with its “flaking rust feeding the weeds.” Bits of the boiler
flake off, and the earth returns the favor by lending beauty in the form of flowers and
vines, accepting it as part of nature. In this passage, it’s clear that not only can the
products of industry coexist with the natural world, but the two aspects feed off one
another, each enhancing the other. As a piece of garbage disposed, the boiler is much
more than a mere water heating system: it’s a home and a literal source of nutrition for
the plant life surrounding it. Even the tree growing in front of it, the datura that completes
the image of the enormous iron “bulb,” is a product of being tossed out as trash. This
theme of refuse sprouting and growing into something much more important will
continue throughout the novel, such as when Mack and the boys recover an old vehicle
that seemingly had not a bit of life left in it, or the fact that their drink of choice is an
amalgamation of every abandoned, half finished drink in a certain bar, passages I’ll delve
into later in this chapter.
Once Mr. and Mrs. Sam Malloy become settled, neither of them so much as think
of working because they’re content where they are: for the jobless inhabitants of Cannery
Row, that’s enough. This applies to the main characters of the novel perhaps more than

57
anyone. Mack and the boys are a group of men with varying backgrounds in work and
idleness who have all left their old lives to live as bums and hobos, and who are generally
well-liked in the town for their genuine personalities. Steinbeck’s description of them
when we first meet them is incredibly telling:

They are the Virtues, the Graces, the Beauties of the
hurried mangled craziness of Monterey and the cosmic
Monterey where men in fear and hunger destroy their
stomachs in the fight to secure certain food, where men
hungering for love destroy everything lovable about
them. Mack and the boys are the Beauties, the Virtues,
the Graces. In the world ruled by tigers with ulcers,
rutted by strictured bulls, scavenged by blind jackals,
Mack and the boys dine delicately with the tigers,
fondle the frantic heifers, and wrap up the crumbs to
feed the sea gulls of Cannery Row. What can it profit a
man to gain the whole world and to come to his
property with a gastric ulcer, a blown prostate, and
bifocals? (Steinbeck 15)

Steinbeck describes their personalities not with adjectives but with their relationship to
other human beings in the world, and by describing the juxtaposition between the two
vastly different bodies. It seems strange, though, that in the first half of this passage
Steinbeck focuses not on who Mack and the boys are, but on the malignance of the
standard viewpoint of living in that era, from the perspective of Mack and the boys. The
effect of this tactic is immediate: it’s forcing the reader to sympathize with the idle
inhabitants of Cannery Row.
At the same time, however, Steinbeck notes an important character trait of Mack
and the boys, which is having pity rather than anger and frustration at the “tigers, bulls
and jackals.” By “dining delicately, fondling, and “wrapping up the crumbs to feed the

58
sea gulls,” they become more than just a group of homeless men or lazy hobos, and
combined with the capitalized “Virtues, the Graces, the Beauties,” Mack and they boys
begin to seem homeless in the same way that the Buddha was homeless, or poor in the
same way that Jesus was poor: by choice. And the more we hear about them, the more
their state and more a trait of some form of enlightenment seems less like a disability or
unfortunate accident. Because they don’t drive themselves to death working, they gain an
entirely different status. During the period that Steinbeck was writing, the choice made
by Mack and the boys would be far from acceptable, and the people in their state would
be expected to obey the American ideal of picking oneself up to standing, so the choice to
write them in as “Virtues, Graces, and Beauties” is completely necessary if Steinbeck’s
contemporaries are to sympathize with them, which is the reason that the triplicate of
capitalized nouns is repeatedly used to describe them.
While many of the run-down men and women in Cannery Row do enjoy the
presence or at least the existence of Mack and the boys, there are other human beings
who completely refuse to sympathize:
Mack and the boys avoid the trap, walk around the
poison, step over the noose while a generation of
trapped, poisoned, trussed-up men scream at them and
call them no-goods, come-to-bad-ends, blots-on-thetown, thieves, rascals, bums. Our Father who art in
nature, who has given the gift of survival to the coyote,
the common brown rat, the English sparrow, the house
fly and the moth, must have a great and overwhelming
love for no-goods and blots-on-the-town and bums, and
Mack and the boys. Virtues and graces and laziness and
zest. Our Father who art in nature. (Steinbeck 15)

59
The first half of this passage makes the case that Mack and the boys are only disliked
because they’ve “avoided the traps” of modern society, and they live free of constraints
and poor health. The angry men are those who seem to have ended up like Jacques of The
Beast Within, angry as some kind of animal, who are “trapped, poisoned” and “trussed
up” like prey or some kind of rodent. These people are not entirely absent from
Steinbeck’s worldview, but are in the background, very much alive. They too are
animals, but Steinbeck, in introducing those that refuse to work for money, also creates
the image of a new type of human animal, though Steinbeck would have thought the
phrase redundant. Indeed, unlike Zola, who posits that men are becoming beasts once
more in the negative sense, Steinbeck believes that all human beings are inseparable from
the creatures of the world, and that this isn’t necessarily a bad thing, nor should it be
considered so.
The second half of this passage, beginning and ending with “Our Father who art
in nature,” puts Mack and the boys into a wider perspective: from the narrow idea of the
definition of “human nature” to just “nature,” they are just animals like any other, and are
merely of a different breed. Through comparing Mack and the boys to sparrows,
houseflies and moths, Steinbeck is refuting the idea that people are any different from
any other creature in the animal kingdom. And the phrase that Steinbeck put at both the
beginning and the ending of the quotation like a prayer, “Our Father who art in nature” is
immensely important because it highlights Steinbeck’s assertion that belief and religion,
once so tied to the idea that nature exists to serve humanity (especially in the Christian
tradition, which is what this phrase is paraphrasing) must apply to much more than
generally held: nature and Our Father are inextricably tied to one another. And this idea

60
harks back to thoughts on Darwinian evolution: Steinbeck’s beliefs in evolution do not,
like we’ve seen in Zola, negatively impact his view of humanity, merely because it
proves that we are animals. Instead, Steinbeck is asserting the fact that evolution
enhances his view of humanity. For instance, in the passage above, we see a kind of
wonder so long associated with biologists studying the variances in the animals of the
natural world. Steinbeck attaches that same belief in variance and wonder to human
beings.
The person who helped set the beauty of nature and evolution into Steinbeck’s
mind was his friend Ed Ricketts, who was quite the famous marine biologist in
Steinbeck’s lifetime, and the two were very close. Ricketts was the one of the causes of
Steinbeck’s fascination with Charles Darwin in particular, as well as his other scientific
interests,2 likely one of the reasons that he wrote about the undeniable animal nature of
humanity, for human beings are, by definition, a part of nature. Mack and the boys
exemplify this idea in both their descriptions and their natures, which are justified by
Steinbeck’s comparison between the group of hobos and various creatures.

…Darwin’s
thinking
reminds
us
of
the
Ricketts/Steinbeck desire to see the parts of something
before reaching conclusions, to observe that the parts
are all related even if we cannot perceive the
connections, and to recognize that it is delusive to see
man as anything but an integral part of the natural
order. (Railsback 30)

2

Steinbeck and Ricketts went on a voyage together in order to replicate Charles Darwin’s
journey on the Beagle: a trip that inspired him to write The Log from the Sea of Cortez.

61
Ed Ricketts was essential in planting the idea of man as an animal in Steinbeck’s
head, and so he was written into Cannery Row as the Doc: the vital character about
whom Steinbeck writes: “Everyone who knew him was indebted to him. And everyone
who thought of him thought next, ‘I really must do something nice for Doc.’” (Steinbeck
29) In fact, this sentiment is precisely what drives the plot of the novel, after those exact
words are echoed in the mouths of Mack and the boys, sending them on a trail to make
money in order to buy goods to throw Doc a party.
The phrase “I really must do something…” rarely, if ever, shows up especially
from the mouths of Mack and the boys. From their distaste for meaningful careers, the
fact that they feel a strong obligation to do something for the Doc means he must have
some kid of profound importance to them, for it drives them to make an exception. To
understand that importance, we must first begin to understand who exactly the Doc is,
and what his role is in Cannery Row.
The Doc is known for giving great advice to anybody he speaks to, and he runs a
store called “Western Biological,” which Steinbeck describes as if he has been there and
loves the memory:
Western Biological deals in strange and beautiful
wares. It sells the lovely animals of the sea, the
sponges, tunicates, anemones, the stars and buttlestars,
and sun stars, the bivalves, barnacles, the worms and
shells, the fabulous and multiform little brothers, the
living moving flowers of the sea… bugs and snails and
spiders… little unborn humans, some whole and other
sliced thin and mounted on slides… You can order
anything from Western Biological and sooner or later
you will get it. (Steinbeck 25-26)

62
The Doc makes his living explicitly selling creatures of the natural world, which Mack
and the boys are so inexplicably tied to, so it seems strange that they would regard him so
highly. Doc sells multitudes, and Steinbeck’s use of the list form with numerous very
similar creatures set side by side juxtaposed against wildly different creatures suggests
that not only is he just scratching at the surface and attempting to get a vague overview of
the things that one can buy in Western Biological, but that there is a wider array that
anyone but a learned marine biologist could possibly know. If these marine wonders were
colors, Doc has all the primaries, secondaries, and every hue between them. But he
doesn’t merely sell animals and those creatures that people at the time would consider
largely different from human beings, or in a different realm of existence entirely, but the
fact that he also sells human beings, albeit merely fetuses, gives us great insight into
Doc’s character: he, like Steinbeck, believes that “it is delusive to see man as anything
but an integral part of the natural order.” (Railsback 30) This likely has to do with the fact
that Doc’s inspiration, Ed Ricketts, was the mentor that taught Steinbeck of that
unseverable connection. However, this portrayal in the novel plays a vital role in
understanding why exactly Mack and the boys so appreciate him as a human being and as
a scientist: because Mack and the boys know that the Doc sees them for the wondrous
and interesting animals and character that they really are, and not what they should be by
societal standards.
The description of the Doc continues later in the same chapter, when Steinbeck
continues along this path:

… his face is half Christ and half satyr and his face tells
the truth. It is said that he helps many a girl out of one
trouble and into another… Doc tips his hat to dogs as

63
he drives by and the dogs look up and smile at him. He
can kill anything for need but he could not even hurt a
feeling for pleasure. (Steinbeck 28)
Of course Doc’s treatment of dogs is similar to his treatment of Mack and the boys, and
from what we know about him, this sort of behavior is not to be considered disrespectful
to Mack, the boys, nor the dogs. He has a consistent respect for life in the most general
sense.
Respect and compassion for life is why Steinbeck creates his image in a doubleheaded, many-faced form. Like the wares in his shop, he contains multitudes: composed
of both Christ and the Satyr. The two figures represent two modes of thought, two time
periods and two ways of viewing the world that are fundamentally different and separate
from one another. Christ, the symbol of humility and love towards other human beings
and the Satyr, a mixture of goat and human being that is usually associated with pagan
gods of the land and nature such as Pan. And if we consider Jefferson’s idea of the
“morality of the land,” Doc’s obsession with the natural world only made him better and
more morally correct.
Further, Steinbeck’s choice of mixing these two extremely different figures paints
the Doc as a sort of otherworldly being, yet one that is so deeply of this world, part of the
landscape and of its people and creatures that he seems to exist outside of everything else,
outside of the conceived spheres of existence: not part of the animalistic world of the
marine animals he studies, nor the coyote world of Mack and the Boys, and certainly not
of the “proper” world of bankers and landlords and farmers. With his chosen profession,
the Doc is able to move between spheres freely, and because this is plain to everyone he
encounters, his presence demands respect.

64
Further, this is precisely the reason that his living, which is gained exclusively by
selling creatures and animals and the “natural world” wholesale does not conflict with his
Satyr and Christ-like status: being able to move freely between spheres gives him the
unique capability of knowing each, and thus much of his desire to sell such things is
fueled by a need to educate others, or to spread interest, to display proudly the various
spheres: indeed, there isn’t much more use for his shop other than those purposes. He
spreads the “morality of the land” in a context fitting the century in which he exists: if
Doc’s goal was to spread his ideas in the twentieth century United States, he could have
been a salesman or a preacher, pasting up billboards with catchy sales slogans or
animatedly spreading his belief through an interpretation of a religious text. But his work
deals exclusively in nature, and he is content making sure other beings are content in any
way he can.
The Doc developed to fit the space between the preacher and the salesman, selling
knowledge and ideas. He is acting as a kind of messiah of nature: the leader of Mack and
the boys who make up his moth-like disciples, swarming unknowingly around his light.
Doc, selling education and his belief of the importance of the natural world and humans’
place in it while the Virtues, the Graces, the Beauties kept their ideas for themselves, and
occasionally from themselves.
Because Mack and the boys have fit themselves into the land rather than fitting
the land around them, they are the Virtues, the Graces, the Beauties. They have taken
Jefferson’s "morality of the land" ideal and lived it. Out of sight, they still function as the
saints of nature and the battered and disposed members of the world. They welcome with
open arms the dejected and those that find no joy in working any longer. Similarly,

65
because they see no great divide between machinery and the rest of the natural world,
when they do work they do so just as hard to save a manufactured product if it promises
to repay them in any way it can. In one instance, Mack and the boys found an old
disposed furnace; an enormous iron monster. It was a long distance away from their
home, but the disposed thing could be of such great use to them if they were able to get it
there, and so they sought the help of the other human beings in the area, and none of them
would reduce themselves to go out of the way to help them move it because they owed
them nothing and could gain nothing from helping them with the move:
… only when they realized that no one was going to
take this stove home for them did they begin to carry it.
It took them three days to carry it to Cannery Row, a
distance of five miles, and they camped beside it at
night. But once installed in the Palace Flophouse it was
the glory and the hearth and the center…With the great
stove came pride, and with pride, the Palace became
home. (Steinbeck 41)

It would surely be a stretch to assert that the carrying of the stove was an act of mercy for
the furnace on Mack and the boys’ part. However, one must account for the extraordinary
effort that the men put into it, especially because these same men never work when they
don’t deem it entirely necessary. But with this stove, once they realized that it would
never be done if they didn’t put in the effort themselves, they resigned themselves to
work constantly to carry it an enormous distance for as long as it would take to get it
there, all because they knew that the work would be afford them an incredible payoff:
they would never have to be cold again. This type of reason for work harks back to the
reasons for working as detailed by Wordsworth’s shepherd in his working paradise.

66
However, as I’ve said before, the fit wouldn’t be perfect without the changes or the
contemporary style of the figure that Steinbeck’s offers. For Mack and the boys, this
industrialized world wrought sour by the Great Depression is ideal: they have evolved to
live in that niche, therefore, trying to find other people to do work for them is part of their
character.
Once the task is completed, however, there is no longer any doubt: they are
prideful and comfortable, like a homesteader who has just finished storing adequate food
and firewood before the first snowfall of the winter season. They have welcomed the
massive boiler into their home, and now as thanks, it will keep them warm and cook their
food for them, and it life will be greatly prolonged. Indeed, every instance in which Mack
and the boys utilize a piece of machinery, never does one single person profit. This is an
important distinction to make, especially during the time in which the novel takes place:
when hordes of people were working for richer men in industrial factories, and often at
the loss of life and limb by the workers, Steinbeck curates scenarios in which man works
in tandem with machinery at nobody’s loss. For instance, when Mack and the boys agree
to help the Doc in the form of gathering frogs for his store, they realize that they require a
mode of transportation to carry them to the pond and the frogs back with them.
And once again, when the need arises, Mack and the boys happen upon used and
broken piece of machinery discarded in a vacant lot. The owner of this particular piece of
machinery, a Model T Ford, also is the owner and fulltime shopkeeper of the
neighborhood grocery store, Lee Chong. Lee Chong, like many other people in the town,
has a parasitic/symbiotic relationship with Mack and the boys: they live in a shed owned
by him in exchange for keeping the windows unbroken and his shop free of antagonists.

67
Lee Chong took the broken Model T in exchange for groceries, but never had the ability
or the need to fix it, and so it rusted in the lot near the shop. So, seeing something that
seems to fit exactly into their need, Mack and the boys sought it out and promised to fix it
up in exchange for allowing them to use it: the Doc would get his frogs, Mack and the
boys would be able to throw their party for the Doc, and Lee Chong would finally have
that old discarded Model T in working condition.
The process of fixing the Model T could even be considered akin to a spiritual
experience that the Romantic poets would have with nature, especially because of the
way the two bodies communicate. One of the boys is an “ex-mechanic” named Gay—a
man who is so incredibly good at his job, and yet has no desire to work for anyone but
himself:

He was such a wonder, Gay was—the little mechanic of
God, the St. Francis of all things that turn and twist and
explode, the St. Francis of coils and armatures and
gears. And if at some time all the heaps of jalopies, cutdown Dusenburgs, Buicks, De Sotos and Plymouths,
American Austins and Isotta-Fraschinis praise God in a
great chorus—it will be largely due to Gay and his
brotherhood. (Steinbeck 66)
This is one of the most important passages in the entire novel concerning both man’s
connection with nature and the machine, and it details how, in the twentieth century, the
overlapping between industry and earth is inevitable: St. Francis is, in all likelihood,
referring to the Saint Francis of Assisi, who, like many catholic Saints, left a life of
luxury in order to pursue a holier life of asceticism. He chose to become impoverished
and a beggar, much like Mack and the boys. He is most remembered for his affinity for
nature and animals, so Gay’s being described as “the St. Francis of coils of all things that

68
run and twist and explode” is directly referring to the inseparability of the two spheres: or
rather, how there aren’t two spheres at all, and nature, man and machine all exist within
the same world and are therefore of the same matter.
Steinbeck’s choice of using the word “heaps,” as well as Gay’s ability to fix cars
that are seemingly destroyed and discarded seems to suggest the idea that only the
downtrodden will truly be saved by the Saint, and thus they “praise God in a great
chorus.” This not only nods to the machine as a natural part of the new American
landscape, but refers to the idea that only those who live ascetically are truly living
correctly, meaning people like Mack and the boys or similar. However, they make up a
small niche in a vast environment: not everyone can live off waste, there must be
producers as well.
The United States represents a relatively new scene in general, and perhaps the
machine—that beast that wreaked such havoc on the other side of the Atlantic ocean,
forcing Wordsworth to turn to nature and immerse himself entirely, unsettling Zola so
much that he assumed its addition would turn people to the most vicious of beasts—was
easily assimilated into the fresh new landscape, but only by those few who decided to
take the idea of “reduced manpower” seriously. People like Mack and the boys did not
reject the machine, and they profited not only because it allowed them not to work nearly
as often, but because it instigated a culture of waste: those objects disposed which could
be utilized with a positive outlook. They are the Beauties, the Graces, the Virtues because
they are modern St. Francises, and because of their need to live life ascetically, surviving
on the waste of others and thriving and living contentedly, harming none and requiring
little. The development of industrial machinery created a niche for them, and they can

69
survive because of the perceived abundance created by it, viewed by many of their
contemporaries as waste and refuse, and yet they live their lives happier than most.
Steinbeck looked at the homeless, vagabond contented and didn’t see a parasite on
society, but a natural evolutionary occurrence: when a niche is created, it must be filled,
and Mack and the boys are happier for it.

70

71

Conclusion
William Wordsworth imagined the life of a shepherd; a working paradise that he
believed was slowly being wiped from civilized society. And less than a century later
when Zola gives us his perspective we realize that it’s not difficult to understand why.
The natural world that human beings belonged to had become invisible or conquered by
Zola’s lifetime, and he saw people compensate for that loss by forgetting what human
beings considered absolutely vital to their humanity, the one thing that separated them
from beasts: their morality. With personhood rendered obsolete by industry in this way
and the scientific understanding of evolution and the actual origins of human beings now
unavoidably known, work became just another means to an end: there was no joy, merely
a track, and the working paradise imagined by Wordsworth became no more than fantasy,
and would have been decidedly written off by naturalist writers such as Émile Zola as
romantic drivel.
The two authors Wordsworth and Zola lived in incredibly varied degrees of
industrialization, and this informed their respective viewpoints on how industry was
affecting the human ability to connect with nature. Wordsworth, born in 1770, around the
start of the industrial revolution, lived during a period when pastoralism was still very
much in the memories of his countrymen, and industry could not have been as developed
as the cities Zola knew and lived in. For Zola, born in 1840, just ten years before the
death of Wordsworth, the memory of a working paradise or a pastoral ideal was a distant

72
fantasy touted by hopeful grandfathers and romantics, but the writer’s experience taught
him that it was not only meaningless but detrimental to chase bright optimism in such a
dreary world proven repeatedly to contain little, if any morality, and by extension,
humanity.
As we’ve seen in the third period of industry after Zola’s dark period of
adjustment to industry, nature and factories have begun to reconcile their differences, and
for John Steinbeck, born only a few months before Zola’s death in 1902, industry, like
human beings, were inseparable from “nature” as Wordsworth saw it, even if the
combination had changed both. For Steinbeck, the twentieth century brought with it the
idea of “old industry,” and machinery that for Wordsworth and Zola would be new, but
had since been discarded and abandoned. This is how Steinbeck reconciles industry and
nature, and of course, human beings. Steinbeck, like Zola, believes that man and nature
are inexplicably linked, though his theories are starkly more optimistic than Zola’s. But
by linking man and nature once more, and in the way he does, Steinbeck uncovers once
more a reincarnation of Wordsworth’s working paradise.
In the twenty first century, it’s much easier to see how connected humans are to
the world environment, and yet the shepherds, like in Steinbeck’s novel, are still quietly
preaching sermons to themselves and hoping that we do not further fracture our
environment, because humans are inseparably part of it. The homeless vagabonds of
Steinbeck’s novel intentionally detached themselves from the humans that cause the most
damage. Steinbeck imagined that human beings could cooperate with nature, but his
characters had to be uncomplaining, relatively quiet people without any wealth to speak
of, not owning a bit of land.

73
But has this reconciliation lasted into the twenty first century? The people that
created the problems of Zola’s novel still existed for Steinbeck, and they continue to exist
today: they use all at their disposal, like the shepherds and farmers of Wordsworth. But
their arms are longer, and their strength virtually limitless. And while the shepherd may
live secluded somewhere like Mack and the boys, the interest in such ideas truly hasn’t
lost much of its relevance in popular culture. For instance, Cormac McCarthy’s 1992
best-selling novel All the Pretty Horses deals with main characters that are fleeing a life
of industry. The reasons they flee civilization are varied, but the underlying purposes are
the same: they all seem to recognize the apocalyptic trajectory that society has taken
against nature, and so they forsake it.
E. B. White, (1899 – 1985) celebrated American naturalist and author of
Charlotte’s Web, wrote each of his stories with an underlying tension between human
beings and nature that could only be reconciled with love and respect, because only then
can we avoid destroying our own environment by working it too roughly. And because
we ourselves are a product of our environment, destroying it will inevitably lead to our
own failure. He writes:

I am pessimistic about the human race because it is too
ingenious for its own good. Our approach to nature is to
beat it into submission. We would stand a better chance
of survival if we accommodated ourselves to this planet
and viewed it appreciatively instead of skeptically and
dictatorially. (E. B. White)

74

Works Cited

Bate, Jonathan. Romantic Ecology: Wordsworth and the Environmental Tradition. London:
Routledge, 1991. Print.
Hugo, Victor. Trans. Donald Long. Je Lisais Que Lisais-Je? Les Contemplations. N.p.:
Gallimard, 1967. 142. Print.
Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac, and Sketches Here and There. Illus. Charles Walsh
Schwartz. New York: Oxford UP, 1987. Print.
Locke, John, and Peter Laslett. Two Treatises of Government. Student ed. Cambridge [England]:
Cambridge UP, 1988. Print.
Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America. New
York: Oxford UP, 1964. Print.
McLean, Stephen. "'The Golden Fly': Darwinism and Degeneration in Émile Zola's Nana."
College Literature 39.3 (2012): 61-79. Print.
Nordau, Max Simon, and George L. Mosse. Degeneration. Memphis: General Books, 2012.
Print.
Railsback, Brian. "Darwin and Steinbeck: The 'Older Method' and Sea of Cortez." Steinbeck
Quarterly 23.1-2 (1990): n. pag. Print.
Robinson, Marian S. "Zola and Monet: The Poetry of the Railway." Journal of Modern
Literature 10.1 (1983): 55-70. Print.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, Roger D. Masters, and Judith R. Masters. The First and Second
Discourses. New York: St. Martin's, 1964. Print.
Steinbeck, John. Cannery Row. New York: Viking, 1945. Print.

Tolstoy, Leo. The Slavery of Our Times. New York: Dodd, Mead & Company, 1900. Print.
Tuckness, Alex, "Locke's Political Philosophy", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2012/entries/locke-political/>. Accessed 20
October 2013.
Wordsworth, William. Wordsworth: Selected Poetry. Ed. Roe Nicholas. London: Penguin, 1992.
Print.
Worster, Donald. Nature's Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas. 2nd ed. Cambridge:
Cambridge UP, 1994. Print.
Zola, Émile. The Experimental Novel. Trans. Belle M. Sherman. New York: Haskell, 1964.
Print.
Zola, Émile, and Roger Whitehouse. The Beast within. London: Penguin, 2007. Print.

