Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2013

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2013

Re-Envisioning Humanism in a Reductionist
World
Anna Elizabeth Hadfield
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Hadfield, Anna Elizabeth, "Re-Envisioning Humanism in a Reductionist World" (2013). Senior Projects Spring 2013. Paper 342.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2013/342

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2013 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Re-Envisioning Humanism in a Reductionist World

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Social Studies
of Bard College

by
Anna Hadfield

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2013

1

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisor, Roger Berkowitz, for challenging and inspiring me
intellectually for the past three years, and for writing the essay on Marilynne Robinson
that first led me to her work;
Matthew Mutter and Steven Tatum, for their unending patience, and for not only helping
me with my project but caring about it;
My parents and my sister, Leah, for their unconditional support and love;
Nellie, Aileen, Mackenzie, Jake, and Matt, for helping me to become more clearly
myself.

“I can only make sense of my unaccountable good fortune by assuming
that it means I am under special obligation to make good use of it.”
-Marilynne Robinson

2

Table of Contents

I. Introduction: The Crisis of Humanism

1

II. Evolution, Darwinism, and the Loss of Human Exceptionalism
III. Recognizing the Crisis: Rowan Williams and Hannah Arendt
IV. The Humanism of Marilynne Robinson

12

39

60

3

I. Introduction: The Crisis of Humanism
In 1933, a document entitled “A Humanist Manifesto” was published in a small
but burgeoning American magazine called The New Humanist. The manifesto, which was
co-signed by more than thirty writers, Unitarian ministers, and academics, including the
philosopher John Dewey, announced the development of a new philosophy forged “out of
the materials of the modern world.” Religion in its traditional forms, the document stated,
had shown itself to be powerless before the demands of the twentieth century and ill
suited to an age shaped by “a vastly increased knowledge and experience.” It had thus
become clear that a new religion was necessary, one that would “formulate its hopes and
plans in the light of the scientific spirit and method” and “discourage sentimental and
unreal hopes and wishful thinking.” This new religion would recognize that man is a part
of nature and reject any supernatural or cosmic accounts of human life and human values.
It would look to many like “a complete break with the past,” for it would “affirm life
rather than deny it.” This new religion, the manifesto declared, was called humanism.1
Modern humanism emerged in the middle decades of the twentieth century as an
articulation of the first, pro-Enlightenment stance, arguing that rationality and science
were the only means of rebuilding society and carrying mankind into the future. In A
Secular Age, Charles Taylor characterizes this new conception of humanism—which he
calls “exclusive humanism”—as accepting no final goals beyond human flourishing.2
Many of what we consider to be quintessentially modern beliefs became consolidated in
the twentieth century under the term humanism. Among these beliefs is, first, the idea

1
2

“Humanist Manifesto I,” Website of the American Humanist Association
Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, 18
4

that religion is based on childish illusions, and that the inclination to religious belief is a
temptation that the modern individual must resist.3 Second, and as a result, human beings
must dictate the ultimate values by which they live, for there is no higher authority on
which to base human standards and norms.4 Third is the belief, fostered by the rise of
modern science, that the orders within which we exist are necessarily impersonal and
indifferent to us, and that accepting this objective understanding of reality enables us to
work towards the common good.5 And this sense of the world as impersonal leads us to
believe, fourth, that we must evaluate everything according to the standards of modern
scientific and analytic thinking, and privilege knowledge reached through reason over
insight gained through intuition.6
These core beliefs, and the Enlightenment values of reason, science, and progress
which they espoused, began to develop long before they came to be associated with
modern humanism. But the rise of humanism was crucial in that it united and popularized
these beliefs as a worldview. Though humanism was an oft-appropriated term in the years
following the publication of the Humanist Manifesto, it was generally associated with a
rejection of religion and a championing of science and rationality as the conjoined hope
of the modern age. Several organizations aligned themselves explicitly with the humanist
cause. In 1941, the American Humanist Association was founded, an outgrowth of the
previously existing Humanist Fellowship at the University of Chicago. In 1967, the
Union of Ethical Societies, a British organization founded in the late nineteenth century,
changed its name to the British Humanist Association. And in 1972, the Rationalist
3

Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, 563
Ibid., 580
5 Ibid., 543
6 Ibid., 555
4

5

Association, another British organization and press, changed the name of its longstanding
magazine to New Humanist. Today, humanism remains as widespread a term as ever
before, perhaps even more so due to its appropriation by a group of popular atheist
writers, called the New Atheists, whose viewpoints many in the humanist community
have embraced.
From the time of its first stirrings in the Enlightenment, the appeal of modern
humanism has been its promise of liberation from intellectual bondage. Humanism is
grounded in the assumption that, for the first time in human history, it has become
possible to see the human condition as it really is, without any otherworldly guarantors of
meaning. As science teaches us more and more about the universe and about ourselves,
so the humanist narrative goes, we are gradually abolishing the limitations to human
freedom and progress. A society guided by science and rationality will not only be free
from the constraints of religious dogma but will be animated by a universal benevolence,
as religious belief is seen as one of the primary sources of hatred and conflict. In the 1933
Humanist Manifesto, the rejection of religion is framed as a matter of taking
responsibility for the welfare of mankind. “Man is at last becoming aware,” it proclaims,
“that he alone is responsible for the realization of the world of his dreams, that he has
within himself the power for its achievement. He must set intelligence and will to the
task.”7
The notion that humanity has in some sense reached maturity and must take
responsibility for human flourishing is integral to modern humanism. Taylor describes

7

“Humanist Manifesto I,” Website of the American Humanist Association
6

how this ethical responsibility, as it is envisioned and enacted by the humanist, translates
into a kind of courageous affirmation of human life in the absence of God:
The unbeliever has the courage to take up an adult stance, and face reality.
He knows that human beings are on their own. But this doesn’t cause him
just to cave in. On the contrary, he determines to affirm human worth, and
the human good, and to work for it, without false illusion or consolation
…Unbelief goes together with modern (exclusive) humanism.8
In humanism, the acceptance of the scientific materialist account of the universe takes on
a moral importance; it is seen as the result of a conscious decision on the part of the
individual to resist the comforting illusions of religion and face facts, without
relinquishing a sense of meaning and purpose. Furthermore, it is by this token that human
beings become capable of grasping and controlling the world.9 Lastly, and crucially, the
humanist accepts that human beings have arisen from nature and do not transcend it; if
human beings are truly unique from other animals, it is a uniqueness won through
evolutionary adaptation, and can be traced as such.
For a number of twentieth century thinkers, the rise of modern humanism was
evidence of a profound shift in the understanding of what it means to be human. Already
in the 1930s, Winston Churchill felt the enormous changes impacting the fundamental
beliefs of European culture. “I wonder whether any other generation has seen such
astounding revolutions of data and values as those through which we have lived,” he
wrote. “Scarcely anything material or established which I was brought up to believe was
permanent and vital, has lasted. Everything I was sure, or was taught to be sure, was

8
9

Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, 562
Ibid.
7

impossible, has happened.”10 In the face of astonishment at the loss of Western culture
and religion, humanism claimed to affirm human worth even as it denied that there was
anything special about human beings warranting this affirmation. It was envisioned as a
great liberation, but it was predicated on a notion of freedom as the possibility of
indefinite progress, as a gradual de-mystification of the world and human life. In 1968,
Cardinal Karol Wojtyla, who would later become Pope John Paul II, wrote a letter to his
friend, the Jesuit theologian Henri de Lubac, reacting to what he saw as the fundamental
crisis of the modern age:
The evil of our times consists in the first place in a kind of degradation,
indeed in a pulverization, of the fundamental uniqueness of each human
person. This evil is even more of the metaphysical order than of the moral
order. To this disintegration planned at times by atheistic ideologies we
must oppose, rather than sterile polemics, a kind of “recapitulation” of the
inviolable mystery of the person.11
Wojtyla’s words reflected the deep sense, shared among many thinkers, that what had
come to be seen as the essence of the human was in fact the opposite. In the ideological
and philosophical battleground of the twentieth century, a new humanism had emerged
that was not only anti-religion but anti-human.
One of the first thinkers to recognize the danger of modern humanism was the
poet and critic T.S. Eliot. In the late 1920s, Eliot wrote two essays following the
publication of a new book by the critic Irving Babbitt, his friend and former teacher. The
subject of the essays was the doctrine of humanism that was at the center of Babbitt’s
philosophy. Though Babbitt’s humanism was not yet a positive philosophy espousing
Enlightenment principles, nor was it grounded in a polemical atheism, Eliot thought that
10

Quoted in Hannah Arendt, “Some Questions of Moral Philosophy” in Responsibility
and Judgment, 50
11 Quoted in George Weigel, “John Paul II and the Crisis of Humanism”
8

the potential for these developments was latent in Babbitt’s metaphysical assumptions.
Babbitt envisioned humanism as the modern alternative to religion, an ethical stance
suited for the individual who believed in the importance of acting according to one’s own
sense of right and wrong rather than in accordance with any external authority. But Eliot
rejected this idea, arguing that the will needed external objects and values on which to
operate.12 He believed, consequently, that humanism could not work without religion,
and warned that “if you find examples of humanism which are anti-religious, then such
humanism is purely destructive, for it has never found anything to replace what it
destroyed.”13 Furthermore, humanism had another main problem, perhaps even more
worrying than the first: it claimed to uphold the worth and dignity of human beings
independent of religion.
For Eliot, this was a contradiction in terms. To reject religion was to reject the
idea that there is anything that makes human beings unique or distinct from nature. “If
you remove from the word ‘human’ all that the belief in the supernatural has given to
man,” he remarked, “you can view him finally as no more than an extremely clever,
adaptable, and mischievous little animal.”14 Humanism purported to affirm the meaning
and purpose of human existence, but it offered no real foundation for this affirmation—or
any of its moral principles, for that matter. In place of a religious idea of the human
being, in which being human means being able to recognize the divine but never attain it,
the modern humanistic point of view implied “that man is either perfectible, or capable of

12

T.S. Eliot, “The Humanism of Irving Babbitt” in Collected Essays, 425
Ibid., 423
14 T.S. Eliot, “Second Thoughts on Humanism” in Collected Essays, 433
13

9

indefinite improvement…the only difference is a difference of degree—so that there is
always hope of a higher degree.”15
This new conception of humanism, Eliot asserted, was a departure from what he
called “true Humanism,” a cultural attitude necessary to society and to religion.
Humanism in this understanding was a “mediating and corrective ingredient” in
civilization, a sensibility that operated against fanaticism. It was “concerned less with
reason than with common sense” and acted as a complement to religion and philosophy
rather than as a substitute for them, always remaining “critical rather than constructive.”16
Indeed, Eliot thought that one of the possible functions of humanism was to re-enliven
religious belief when it was in danger of falling into mere ritual and habit.17 But he feared
that humanism would become more and more a positive philosophy, destructive rather
than critical, dogmatic in its opposition to all religious or transcendent understandings of
human life.
In the wake of World War II, two other twentieth century thinkers devoted their
attention to the question of humanism: Jean-Paul Sartre and Martin Heidegger. On
October 29, 1945, Sartre delivered a lecture in Paris entitled “Existentialism is a
Humanism”––later published as an essay under the same name––in which he rejected the
kind of humanism that conceives of man as the “supreme value.” Humanism in this
sense, he argued, could only lead to a “cult of humanity” because it presupposed that
there is a universal human nature that we can judge and worship.18 But Sartre
distinguished this false humanism from another meaning of humanism: that “man is
15

T.S. Eliot, “Second Thoughts on Humanism,” 437
Ibid., 436
17 T.S. Eliot, “The Humanism of Irving Babbitt,” 423
18 Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, 52
16

10

always outside of himself, and it is in projecting and losing himself beyond himself that
man is realized; and, on the other hand, it is in pursuing transcendent goals that he is able
to exist.”19 Sartre’s conception of this “true” humanism was atheistic; it reminded man
that he exists always in an “abandoned state,” with no legislator other than himself, and
that liberation was only possible through the acceptance of this condition.20 But his
conception was also mystical, grounded in the recognition that human beings only find
meaning through self-transcendence.
In contrast to Sartre, Martin Heidegger rejected humanism not because it valued
human beings too highly but because it didn’t value them highly enough.21 In 1946,
Heidegger wrote the Letter on Humanism in response to a letter from a French admirer
named Jean Beaufret, who asked how sense could be restored to the word humanism.
Heidegger’s answer was startling: “This question proceeds from your intention to retain
the word ‘humanism.’ I wonder whether that is necessary. Or is the damage caused by all
such terms still not sufficiently obvious?”22 Heidegger believed that in proceeding from
the definition of man as a rational animal, the entire humanistic or metaphysical tradition
had conceived of man from a biological perspective that could never fully capture his
essence as the shepherd of Being. The danger of separating human beings from Being
was clear, for Heidegger, from Europe’s past. Peter Sloterdijk, one of the most interesting
and provocative readers of Heidegger, writes that “Heidegger interprets the historical
world of Europe as the theater of militant humanism; it is the battlefield on which human
subjectivity, with its portentous consequences, has acted out its domination over

20

Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, 52-53
Martin Heidegger, Letter on Humanism in Pathmarks, 251
22 Ibid., 241
21

11

Being.”23 What was needed was not a revived humanism, but a new philosophy that
would recognize the ontological relationship of human beings to Being.
Though each of these thinkers—Pope John Paul II, T.S. Eliot, Jean-Paul Sartre,
and Martin Heidegger—conceived of the crisis differently, all of them recognized that
humanism as it had come to be understood in the modern age was a threat to an ancient
idea of the human essence. They recognized a distinction between true humanism, which
was a commitment to the preservation of the worth and mystery of the human person, and
a distinctly modern and false idea of humanism, which glorified and worshipped humans
as the beings who could create themselves and control the world. Even Heidegger, who
rejected the word humanism entirely, did so because he thought that humanism could
never sufficiently account for the essence of the human being as it was claimed by Being.
The rise of modern humanism was thus, for these thinkers, the moment when it became
clear that true humanism had fallen into crisis.
Following from the positivist rejection of the Western metaphysical and religious
traditions, modern humanism has proposed an account of reality as ultimately knowable
and explainable, a closed system. It believes that we can provide an exhaustive account of
the universe, of being, by reducing it to its parts and extracting from them final
conclusions about the nature of our reality. This model has brought with it a new
understanding of the human being as an object that can be studied and analyzed, and is
likewise reducible to certain fundamental laws. Though one of the core narratives of
modern humanism is the importance of accepting human finitude, it accords to human

23

Peter Sloterdijk, “Rules for the Human Zoo,” 19
12

beings a seemingly limitless capacity to know the world and themselves objectively, and
envisions this capacity as the essence of human freedom.
In the name of rejecting childish “illusion,” modern humanism actually rejects
something much more fundamental: the idea that human beings have the capacity to
apprehend and participate in a larger reality. This notion of the exceptionality of human
consciousness is not unique to the Western religious tradition, the target of modern
humanism’s condemnation, though this tradition is one way in which this notion has been
preserved. That human beings are somehow privileged among other forms of life in their
relationship to being was an ancient understanding that conveyed a sense of fundamental
belonging to the world. While this feeling of belonging may not have been lost with the
rise of modern science and philosophy, it has come to be seen as a false and selfimportant illusion. In cutting off human beings from a larger reality and denying the
human capacity for self-transcendence, modern humanism is in fact deeply antihumanistic.
In my first chapter, I will look at the discourse surrounding evolution, which has
become fundamental to modern humanism, as a case study for thinking about how the
scientific worldview accounts for—or rather, fails to account for—the human being. In
my critique of the thinking of various Darwinists, including Charles Darwin himself, I
will also use the work of the contemporary novelist and essayist Marilynne Robinson,
who has become one of the most outspoken critics of Darwinism. In the second chapter, I
will focus on two thinkers, the political philosopher Hannah Arendt and the former
Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams, both of whom I believe have recognized the
crisis of humanism, in order to explore how they conceive of this crisis and its origins. In

13

the last chapter, I will return to Marilynne Robinson, whose fiction and nonfiction has
stood out to me in its commitment to resisting the reductionist spirit of our times.

14

II. Evolution, Darwinism, and the Loss of Human Exceptionalism
There has been no greater single threat to the idea of human exceptionalism than
the theory of evolution. Even before Darwin’s Origin of Species was published in 1859,
evolution was a subject of tremendous controversy, provoking deep theological and
metaphysical questioning about the role of human beings within nature and within the
universe. We have seen a revival of the evolution controversy in our times with the rise
of creationism and its more sophisticated counterpart, intelligent design. But neither
camp has challenged evolution and Darwinism in a compelling way. Intelligent design
has never really been taken seriously by evolutionary biologists because its arguments
rest on very shaky scientific ground, while creationism has only served to cheapen the
debate surrounding evolution by making it about Biblical fundamentalism.24 By either
contending with the science of evolution (intelligent design) or else rejecting scientific
evidence entirely on the basis of Biblical literalism (creationism), the contemporary
opposition to evolution by many on the religious right largely fails to address
meaningfully the implications of evolution for how we conceive of our world and
ourselves. It thus largely fails to capture what is really at stake.
The crucial thing that evolution did was erode any fundamental biological
distinction between human beings and animals. But Darwin’s theory and its lineage,
Darwinism, also heavily contributed to the sense that this distinction was philosophically
untenable as well. Darwin was determined to show—and went about doing so in The
24

In fact, the recent spike in creationist thinking has probably only helped the
Darwinists to make their case, especially to those on the left. Marilynne Robinson
calls creationism “the best thing that could have happened to Darwinism, the
caricature of religion that has seemed to justify Darwinist contempt for the whole of
religion.” (Marilynne Robinson, The Death of Adam, 40)
15

Descent of Man—that everything that was thought of as uniquely human, whether it be
language, morality, civilization, appreciation of beauty, or religion, had emerged from
animals.25 And Darwinists have followed suit, some with a very clear agenda of
dismantling what they see as hubristic human exceptionalism and others who believe in
the superiority of a materialist account of human consciousness and behavior. Either way,
what the theory of evolution set in motion was the gradual loss of the idea that human
existence has some sort of final mystery about it that cannot be accounted for,
scientifically or otherwise.
The discourse surrounding evolution is complex and far-reaching, and my
purpose here is not to contend with evolution scientifically, or to attempt to account for
all of the many interpretations of evolution that arose both before and after Darwin.
Rather, what I wish to examine is the way in which certain common interpretations of the
theory of evolution either explicitly reject the idea that human beings have intrinsic
worth, or else challenge this idea implicitly in their models of human behavior by
assuming that human beings are fundamentally explainable in biological terms.
Distinguishing between what could be called the scientific “fact” of evolution and its
possible political and social implications is notoriously difficult, and accounts for much
of the debate surrounding evolution.26 Granting this difficulty, however, there is a

25

Janet Browne, Darwin’s Origin of Species: A Biography, 111
George Levine comments that “while one might wish to rip Darwin out of the
hands of conservative politicos, it would be a mistake not to recognize that to a
certain extent he has always been in those hands and that there has always been
something about the Darwinian program that has invited political application, even
by Darwin himself. Darwin went on record connecting human to animal biology and
behavior. However scientific the project, there can be none more latent with
ideological possibilities.” (George Levine, Darwin Loves You: Natural Selection and
the Re-Enchantment of the World, 49)
26

16

definite tendency among many popular evolutionary thinkers to derive from the theory of
evolution certain totalizing conclusions about the essence of human beings and their
place within the universe, and to claim that these conclusions are the inevitable scientific
implications of the theory itself.
One of the central questions within the evolution discourse is the extent to which
science is dependent on historically contingent cultural attitudes and norms, and whether
a “pure” science that restricts itself to describing objective reality and is independent
from culture is even possible.27 Though there is no final answer to this question, the
discourse surrounding evolution has always been interwoven with modern humanism, as
the discovery of evolution is commonly interpreted as having emptied the world of what
Max Weber called “mysterious incalculable forces.”28 That human beings are the product
of a long sequence of evolutionary adaptations has been taken as proof by many that
there is ultimately nothing truly unique or special about human beings, and that the nature
of mind, however complex it may be, is such that it can be entirely explained in terms of
its biological workings. Leaving open the question of whether the theory of evolution
itself is inherently problematic, many of the popular articulations of evolution that have
flourished from Darwin’s time until today are reflective of a larger cultural acceptance of
simplistic and mechanistic accounts of human behavior as the only “true” accounts.
In this chapter I will look at two readings of evolution in terms of their
metaphysical implications for thinking about human beings. According to the first
reading, in which I will include Darwin’s articulation of evolution, natural selection
works progressively, gradually creating better and better products, so that the
27
28

Michael Ruse, Mystery of Mysteries: Is Evolution a Social Construction?, 9
Max Weber, “Science as a Vocation” in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, 7
17

development of higher consciousness and human beings can be considered inevitable.
According to the second reading, natural selection works by random, favorable
mutations, without any specific goal or judgments of value. The latter interpretation tends
to emphasize the lack of qualitative difference between humans and animals and denies
that the eventual development of human life was in any way inevitable. Both
interpretations, however, show the danger of conceiving of human beings solely in
biological terms, progressivism because it implies that human beings are perfectible and
thus that some are less valuable than others, and anti-progressivism because it denies the
complexity and uniqueness of human existence altogether. It is when evolution is
privileged as an exhaustive account of human life that it leaves the realm of science and
becomes a cultural construction, in conjunction with modern humanism.
It was Darwin himself who set the precedent for the idea that evolution inevitably
changes, for better or for worse, our conception of human beings. In The Descent of Man,
he writes that “the mental faculties of man and the lower animals do not differ in kind,
although immensely in degree.”29 No statement perhaps encapsulates better the threat
evolution poses to an idea of intrinsic human worth. If we conceive of the human mind
solely in terms of biology, or even in terms of particular definable “faculties,” the line
between “human” and “animal” becomes all too quickly unclear, and what we think of as
distinctly human attributes become meaningless biological processes. Even Darwin
himself was concerned with how his theory seemed to blur this distinction. In a wellknown letter to his friend, the philosopher and political economist William Graham, he
summed up neatly the precariousness of an evolutionary account of mind:

29

Darwin, The Descent of Man in Norton, 224
18

But then with me the horrid doubt always arises whether the convictions
of man’s mind, which has been developed from the mind of the lower
animals, are of any value or at all trustworthy. Would any trust in the
convictions of a monkey’s mind, if there are any convictions in such a
mind?30
As soon as there is no longer anything about human beings that cannot be reduced to and
explained by its biological origins, the human mind seems to merit doubt rather than
reverence. We begin to fear that our mind is nothing more than a complex instrument of
self-deception, if our deepest convictions are nothing more than elaborate products of a
fundamental and all-encompassing struggle for survival.
The line of reasoning that Darwin adopted in much of his work, and the
implications of which he was hinting at in his letter to Graham, became known as
reductionism. In the most basic of terms, this is the idea that everything at the higher
level can be fully explained in terms of the lower level. Meaning, in order to understand
complex structures—the phenomena of human consciousness and behavior, for
example—we can study the smaller and less complicated structures of which it is
composed—like the gene—and use this observation to formulate generalized laws about
how the complex structures function and operate.31 Though Darwin never described his
method as “reductionist,” comments George Levine, this reasoning was implicit in his
arguments:
In a certain sense the reductionism is only an updated version of Darwin’s
own argument that we can understand morality as growing out of the
“social instincts,” the herd behavior that served to minimize the danger to
groups of animals through the tendency of individual members of the
group to announce, even at their own risk, the presence of predators.32
30

Darwin, Darwin Correspondence Project
George Levine, Darwin Loves You: Natural Selection and the Re-Enchantment of the
World, 51-53
32 Ibid., 52
31

19

While Darwin may not have intended to say that human morality was a herd instinct, but
rather that it had originated as one, the nature of reductionist reasoning is that it collapses
this difference because it posits that, in tracing the origins of something like morality, we
provide a complete account of it. To say that human beings evolved from primates comes
to mean that human beings are primates, not just in a biological sense but also in a
cultural sense.
Since Darwin, many respected evolutionary biologists have resisted the
reductionist line of reasoning with which evolutionary thinking has been associated. This
resistance is often based on the argument that reductionism, in assuming that complex
structures can be explained in terms of the smaller structures that compose it, does not
look at the relationships among the smaller structures themselves, and thus does not
account for how these relationships change the way the smaller phenomena behave. One
of the strongest critics of reductionism in this respect is Richard Lewontin, who has
argued that it was not an essential part of Darwin’s thinking. Another critic of
reductionism is the philosopher of science John Dupré, who has argued that “as objects
are united into integrated wholes they acquire new properties,” and that these causal
properties are just as real as those at the lower level. Nonetheless, reductionism provided
the grounding for the evolutionary disciplines of sociobiology, which looks at the
biological basis of social behavior, and its descendent, evolutionary psychology, both of
which claim status as legitimate sciences.33

33

George Levine, Darwin Loves You: Natural Selection and the Re-Enchantment of the
World, 53-57
20

Reductionism is also foundational to the branch of evolutionary thinking known
as Darwinism. Darwinism is not synonymous with the theory of evolution, which refers
to “the change in groups of organisms over time, so that descendants differ from their
ancestors.”34 Rather, Darwinism is an interpretation of this phenomenon that extends
beyond the science of evolution. Its meaning varies depending on context. The
philosopher Michael Ruse defines it as “the claim that natural selection is the
overwhelmingly significant causal factor in evolution.”35 In her essay “Darwinism,”
Marilynne Robinson goes farther, making a distinction between “evolution, the change
the occurs in organisms over time, and Darwinism, the interpretation of this phenomenon
which claims to refute religion and to imply a personal and social ethic which is, not
coincidentally, antithetical to the assumptions imposed and authorized by JudeoChristianity.”36
Both definitions are compatible with a general characterization of Darwinism as a
materialist worldview that is usually (though not always) accompanied by the following
beliefs: that self-interest is the prevailing rule in human and animal relations, that the
universe is not only completely intelligible but ultimately purposeless, and that
knowledge and acceptance of evolution is incompatible with belief in God. Though
Darwinists deny that they are concerned with anything but objective readings of natural
fact, the implications of the reductionist approach they employ are manifestly

34

Michael Ruse, Mystery of Mysteries, 279
Ruse defines natural selection as “the key Darwinian mechanism for evolutionary
change, claiming that a small percentage of organisms in each generation survive
and reproduce owing to characteristics which other members of the population do
not possess; these adaptive characteristics are passed along to offspring.” (Ibid.,
282)
36 Marilynne Robinson, The Death of Adam, 30
35

21

metaphysical—or rather, anti-metaphysical. In proceeding according to the assumption
that everything, including the human being, is no more than the sum of its parts,
Darwinism takes as a given a radically devalued conception of the human being that is
unique to the modern age.
Darwin’s reductionist approach to thinking about human beings is an undeniable
part of his work and his legacy. So, too, is the influence of progressivism on his
conceptualizing of natural selection, even though the question of whether or not there is
an inherent idea of progress in Darwin’s work remains highly controversial. In light of
the eugenics movements of the 20th century, Darwinists often seek to downplay any
progressivist tendencies in Darwin’s work. They argue that Social Darwinism—the idea,
popularly characterized as “survival of the fittest,” that human society is a competition in
which the most worthy necessarily rise to the top—was a misinterpretation of what
Darwin actually wrote, or else seek to dismiss the morally questionable parts of Darwin’s
thinking as merely products of his time and easily separable from the science itself. Philip
Appleman, a recognized expert on the life and work of Charles Darwin and the editor of
the Norton Critical Edition Darwin, remarks that while Darwin may have strayed
“innocently” into an occasional analogical and unscientific discussion about the nature of
human life, “others took that step knowingly and intentionally.”37 Darwin’s work,
Appleman and others argue, is not implicated by regrettable misinterpretations of his
theory.
Despite these claims, there is a clear part of Darwin’s work that describes
evolution as progressing towards some sort of biological perfection. While this does not

37

Philip Appleman, “Darwin: On Changing the Mind (2010)” in Norton, 10
22

implicate all of Darwin’s thought, it does reveal the inherently morally problematic
aspect of Darwin’s theory of natural selection—an aspect that many Darwinists do not
take seriously enough. Natural selection displaced a Judeo-Christian sense of theological
purpose with a new idea of biological purpose, and it was this idea that lay the grounding
for the rise of Social Darwinism and eugenics. While Darwin himself certainly did not
advocate these programs explicitly, his theory lent itself well to them because it opened
up the possibility of human perfectibility and thus of basing human worth on contingent
biological traits.
The idea of biological progress shaped Darwin’s theory from its conception.
According to most accounts, the crucial and final piece of the theory of natural selection,
that favorable variations are preserved and unfavorable variations destroyed, was inspired
by Thomas Malthus’ 1798 Essay on the Principle of Population, which Darwin read in
the final months of his writing of the Origin. The basic thesis of the essay was that
population increase would always outstrip the growth in food supply, thus causing
periodic misery and famine, and that therefore all food assistance should be withheld
from the poorest and weakest. In the frankest of terms, this would ensure that those who
were dragging everyone else down would eventually die, bringing the food supply and
the rate of population increase into favorable alignment and thereby removing a
fundamental impediment to human happiness. Furthermore, the struggle for existence
that this “policy” helped to encourage was necessarily an ongoing, and distinctly
teleological, process.
Malthus framed the problem of population growth as a distinctly moral issue,
arguing that what was needed was a complete reversal of society’s current moral

23

standards. Poverty should henceforth be regarded as disgraceful, not cause for
compassion. Writes Malthus:
We are bound in justice and honor formally to disclaim the right of the
poor to support. To this end, I should propose a regulation to be made,
declaring, that no child born. . .should ever be entitled to parish assistance
. . .The illegitimate infant is, comparatively speaking, of little value to the
society, as others will immediately supply its place. . .38
Malthus stopped short of saying, as Social Darwinist Herbert Spencer would say later,
that those who were to die as a result of these policies deserved to. Rather, he saw the
withholding of charity as an unfortunate but necessary step in the righting of society.
What Darwin did was give the idea the gloss of a scientific prescription, showing that it
was ultimately nature, not man and his grim calculations, that dictated the necessity of
such a struggle. “Man, like every other animal, has no doubt advanced to his present high
condition through a struggle for existence consequent on his rapid multiplication,” he
wrote, “and if he is to advance still higher, it is to be feared that he must remain subject to
a severe struggle.”39 While Malthus’ ideas about population growth were prescriptions
for a society that the Christian charity ethic had supposedly led astray, Darwin’s
competition was already at work in the natural world and in human society itself; indeed,
human society owed its very existence to such unrelenting competition.
In his own work, Darwin attempted to “mitigate the force of Malthusian
pitilessness,” as Robert J. Richards writes, by conceiving of nature as a benevolent
force.40 In the final chapter of the Origin of Species, Darwin remarks, “When we reflect
on this struggle, we may console ourselves with the full belief, that the war of nature is
38

Thomas Malthus, Essay on the Principle of Population, 135
Darwin, The Descent of Man in Norton, 253
40 Robert J. Richards, “Darwin’s Theory of Natural Selection and its Moral Purpose”
in The Cambridge Companion to the “Origin of Species,” 64

39

24

not incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and that the vigorous, the
healthy, and the happy survive and multiply.”41 Whether or not this conclusion is in fact
consoling certainly depends on whether one believes that vigor, health, and happiness are
indeed the standards by which we determine someone’s worthiness. Richards, for his
part, frames his thesis that Darwin’s conception of nature was inherently moral in
opposition to most contemporary Darwinian scholars, who have “described Darwinian
nature as mechanical, even amoral in its ruthlessness.” Darwin, Richards argues,
recognized that his original formulation of the theory of natural selection “carried certain
consequences with which he did not wish to dispense,” and in response tried to mitigate
such consequences by framing evolution as progressive, controlled by “a wise selector
that has the good of creatures at heart.”42 But Richards does not understand that what is
ruthless about Malthusian natural selection is not that it kills with little regard for value,
but that it evaluates the value of particular people and groups in the first place. He
attempts to show that in Darwin’s model natural selection is just rather than ruthless, but
his defense ends up being reminiscent of the very ideas from which he is trying to
distance Darwin: Social Darwinism and its queer idea of justice, in which the happiest
and the strongest rightfully take their place in the biological chain of survival.
In Darwin’s framework, the perishing of the weakest was necessary for the
gradual improvement of all things. In the contemporary popular discourse, natural
selection is thought to have challenged or even debunked the idea that the world is
designed and purposeful. Philip Appleman sums up such a view: “Natural selection

41

Quoted in Robert J. Richards, “Darwin’s Theory of Natural Selection and its Moral
Purpose” in The Cambridge Companion to the “Origin of Species,” 64
42 Ibid., 65
25

pictured the world in a constant process of change, but without the apparent prior
intention of going anywhere in particular or of becoming anything in particular.”43 But
though this may be how evolution came to be understood, the theory as Darwin wrote
about it often implied general advancement. At the end of the Origin of Species, for
example, he writes that “as natural selection works solely by and for the good of each
being, all corporeal and mental endowments will tend to progress towards perfection.”44
And as Marilynne Robinson points out, even the title itself of Darwin’s seminal work, On
the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favored
Races in the Struggle for Life, is value-laden: “It clearly implies that whatever is is right,
and—even less tenably—that whatever is is the product of raw struggle, and—still less
tenably—that there is a teleology behind it all, one which favors and preserves.”45 It is
not inaccurate to say that Darwin envisioned natural selection as doing the omniscient
work of God, except that natural selection determined what was to be preserved
according to what best endured the ceaseless struggle of existence.
That natural selection works to preserve “favored races” was not just a rhetorical
turn of phrase. In his writings Darwin often spoke about higher and lower races of man,
and in 1871’s The Descent of Man he writes:
At some future period, not very distant as measured by centuries, the
civilized races of man will almost certainly exterminate, and replace, the
savage races throughout the world. At the same time the
anthropomorphous apes. . .will no doubt be exterminated. The break
between man and his nearest allies will then be wider, for it will intervene
between man in a more civilized state, as we may hope, even than the

43

Philip Appleman, “Darwin: On Changing the Mind (2010)” in Norton, 14
Darwin, The Origin of Species in Norton, 174
45 Marilynne Robinson, The Death of Adam, 44

44

26

Caucasian, and some ape as low as a baboon, instead of as now between
the negro or Australian and the gorilla.46
Granted, Darwin was not arguing for the elimination of the “lower races” when he wrote
these words, but rather describing what he thought to be happening. He was writing in a
time in which the notion of “civilization” versus “savagery” was common, unremarkable,
and framed as a moral issue. But the idea underlying these words of Darwin’s, that
human beings progress not only societally but biologically—and that societal,
civilizational, and moral progress could, in turn, become manifest biologically—was
new. Natural selection for Darwin governed not only teleologically but morally. Its
workings were judgments of value. Not only was Darwin aware that natural selection as
he conceived of it seemed mercilessness, he also lamented, following Malthus, that
civilized society did not replicate this same merciless process of elimination, instead
caring for the weak and tending to the sick.47
Darwin acknowledges in The Descent of Man that the fact human beings had
evolved from lower forms would be “highly distasteful to many.”48 But he did not think
that this necessarily decreased man’s stature. In fact, in envisioning human beings as
perfectible through the workings of natural selection, Darwin subtly offered a new way of
conceiving of human worth. Though The Descent of Man amounts to a systematic
dismantling of each human attribute as inherently sexual or animalistic in origin, Darwin
46

Darwin, The Descent of Man in Norton, 101
From The Descent of Man: “With savages, the weak in body and mind are soon
eliminated; and those that survive commonly exhibit a vigorous state of health. We
civilized men, on the other hand, do our utmost to check the process of
elimination…Thus the weak members of society propagate their kind. No one who
has attended to the breeding of domestic animals will doubt that this must be highly
injurious to the race of man.” (Quoted in George Levine, Darwin Loves You: Natural
Selection and the Re-Enchantment of the World, 61)
48 Darwin, The Descent of Man in Norton, 253
47

27

makes a point to acknowledge the “immense superiority” of man over the animals.49 That
he sees no conflict between these two notions was evident of the fact that he sees value as
inhering in performance; indeed, his use of the term “superiority” is crucial, as it
indicates that the difference between human beings and animals is a matter of degree
(while “exceptional” would imply a difference in kind). At the end of the text, Darwin
makes explicit how it is possible to conceive of human worth in evolutionary terms:
Man must be excused for feeling some pride at having risen, though not
through his own exertions, to the very summit of the organic scale; and the
fact of his having thus risen, instead of having been aboriginally placed
there, may give him hope for a still higher destiny in the distant future.50
While the Judeo-Christian cosmology may have derived man’s uniqueness and
superiority from his having been created in the image of God, Darwin saw man as having
won this privileged place himself, and thought he was capable of rising still higher.
The idea that our superiority was supposedly earned by us rather than given to us,
and that we can find our worth in this fact, is one that has been preserved in Darwinism.
Philip Appleman writes, “If we now consider ourselves special because of our highly
developed, highly specialized brain, rather than because of some traditional myth—and if
we choose scientific fact in preference to superstition—our place in the world
nevertheless remains important to us.”51 Believing that evolution has culminated in
humankind is a way of restoring meaning to human existence. And it is in one sense a
compelling interpretation, if only because it recognizes the problem of finding human
worth in evolution and attempts to propose a solution.

49

Darwin, The Descent of Man in Norton, 200
Ibid., 254
51 Philip Appleman, “Darwin: On Changing the Mind (2010)” in Norton, 18
50

28

If it is our hard-won and highly developed brain that affords us our worth,
however, and evolution does in fact work progressively, all of the same dangers that gave
rise to Social Darwinism and eugenics remain. If our worth is to be found strictly in our
biology, would it not be augmented by altering and improving this biology? E.O. Wilson,
the founder of sociobiology and an unabashedly progressivist Darwinist, articulated such
a possible scenario in his 1978 book On Human Nature:
In time, much knowledge concerning the genetic foundation of social
behavior will accumulate, and techniques may become available for
altering gene complexes by molecular engineering and rapid selection
through cloning. At the very least, slow evolutionary change will be
feasible through conventional eugenics. The human species can change its
own nature. What will it choose?52
Wilson’s scenario serves as an example of where a biology-based notion of human worth
might lead, and though it may seem far-fetched, his characterization of the problem is
apt. If our worth lies in our biology, and evolution renders us biologically malleable, the
question then becomes what parts of us we want to value—and what we want to devalue.
For Wilson, there is possibility, rather than catastrophe, in such a scenario, as it restores
the possibility of human freedom where otherwise it would seem to be threatened. While
humans beings may be explainable in terms of, and even reducible to, our origins, we will
soon reach a point in our evolutionary development where we will be able to choose our
future.
The idea of progress, as Marilynne Robinson writes, always implies a judgment of
value.53 In conceiving of evolution in terms of progress, Darwin laid the grounding for
such judgments of value, which we now characterize and often dismiss as Social

52
53

E.O. Wilson, On Human Nature: Revised Edition, 208
Marilynne Robinson, The Death of Adam, 29
29

Darwinism. These ideas were relatively simple and logical and very powerful. They are
not as easy to separate from the “pure science” of evolution and natural selection as we
might think. The theory of natural selection, as inspired by Malthus and articulated by
Darwin, was never morally neutral or purely scientific. It was seen not just as a
description of how life develops but as the sole causal explanation for life itself, and it
implied that ruthless struggle is necessary for progress. Natural selection was used to
justify ideological movements because it was, in its origins at least, an ideological
account of reality.
With the exception of E.O. Wilson and Richard Dawkins, another popular
Darwinist, most contemporary Darwinists have attempted to distance the theory of
evolution by natural selection from any explicit notion of biological progressivism. They
believe that the idea that evolution works progressively is an unscientific social
construction and for the sake of “responsible” science refrain from reading into evolution
in that way. They assert that we do not have the conclusion that humans are superior,
only that they are different. Writes Michael Ruse, “Seeing evolution as a progressive
process leading up to humankind is a human-created picture rather than a disinterested
reflection of reflective reality.”54 Contemporary Darwinists are quick to point this out
because they recognize that progressive Darwinism falls into dangerous territory very
quickly. In addition to being motivated by the desire to keep science untainted by cultural
projections, some Darwinists also aim to dismantle an idea of human exceptionalism that
they believe to be a harmful religious falsehood. Instead of latching onto the progressivist
aspects of Darwin’s thinking, these thinkers focus on how Darwin showed that there was

54

Michael Ruse, Darwinism and Its Discontents, 202
30

no fundamental biological difference between humans and animals. But although these
neo-Darwinists are right to be wary of biological progressivism, their account of
evolution casts the development of human life as a mere cosmic accident. To truly
understand evolution, they argue, is to understand the insignificance of human life within
the natural order.
Stephen Jay Gould is one Darwinist who rejected progressivism entirely, stressing
that natural selection was only a principle of local adaptation, not of general advance or
progress.55 He was adamant about separating the science of evolution from any
ideological implications, and he spent the last two decades of his career arguing against
progressivism, which he thought was the major flaw of the Wilson’s sociobiological
program. Progressivism was in Gould’s eyes a major impediment to any kind of genuine
social progress; he recognized, rightly, that it could be used to justify claims about
biological differences between humans, with some being held up as innately superior to
others. He even wrote a book, The Mismeasure of Man, on the history of biological
determinism in the United States, showing how such ideas are no more than “prejudice
dressed up to look like science.”56
In rejecting the progressivist reading of evolution, Gould stressed the extreme
improbability of the development of human consciousness. In one of his seminal works,
The Structure of Evolutionary Theory, he argues that human beings arose “as a fortuitous
and contingent outcome of thousands of linked events, any one of which could have
occurred differently and sent history on an alternative pathway that would not have led to

55

Stephen Jay Gould, “The Evolution of Life on Earth” in The Richness of Life: The
Essential Stephen Jay Gould, 209
56 Michael Ruse, Mystery of Mysteries, 145
31

consciousness.”57 This is a scientific claim, one that poses no threat to how we conceive
of human beings.58 Indeed, that there were apparently “thousands” of instances in which
human existence could have been rendered impossible, and yet was not, might seem to
some—a religious believer, for example—to hint of something like inevitability.
Improbability would seem, in this instance, only to add to the extraordinariness of such a
course of events and the meaningfulness of its product.
Gould does not stop, however, at the descriptive claim that human beings were a
cosmic accident. His grasp of the danger and pervasiveness of biological determinism has
a clear influence on his rhetoric, as it leads him to emphasize not only the improbability
but the insignificance of higher consciousness in the evolutionary scheme of things. In
“The Evolution of Life on Earth” he calls human consciousness “but a tiny, late-arising
twig on life’s enormously aborescent bush.”59 His choice of words is also noticeable
when he addresses, earlier in the essay, the difficulty of separating progress from
evolution:
. . .Our conventional desire to view history as progressive, and to see
humans as predictably dominant, has grossly distorted our interpretation of
life’s pathway by falsely placing in the center of things a relatively minor
phenomenon that arises only as a side consequence of a physically
constrained starting point.60

57

Stephen Jay Gould, “The Evolution of Life on Earth” in The Richness of Life: The
Essential Stephen Jay Gould, 215
58 It is also a disputed claim. As journalist Robert Wright comments in an essay
critiquing Gould, “if you really pay attention to what Gould is saying, you might start
to wonder how evolution could have created anything as intricate as a human
being.” (Robert Wright, “The Accidental Creationist: Why Stephen Jay Gould is Bad
for Evolution,” 1)
59 Gould, 220
60 Ibid., 213-14
32

The “relatively minor phenomenon” to which Gould refers is, ostensibly, the
development of human life. Though Gould is speaking descriptively, and often in
metaphor, there is a tendency for his language to imply a judgment of value. In pushing
back against the progressivist Darwinism that led to biological determinism, he adopts a
rhetoric that is problematic in its own right.
Later in the same essay, Gould’s aversion to the idea of progress becomes even
more striking. He paraphrases Sigmund Freud’s remark that great revolutions in the
history of science have one feature in common: “they knock human arrogance off one
pedestal after another of our previous examples of our self-importance.” In this sense,
Gould continues, the Darwinian revolution is incomplete, as “most of us are still
unwilling to abandon the comforting view that evolution means (or at least embodies a
central principle of) progress defined to render the appearance of something like human
consciousness either virtually inevitable or at least predictable.”61 Though Gould is still
reacting to the equation of evolution with progress, and progress with higher
consciousness, here he leaves the realm of description and makes a claim as to meaning:
to say that human life is an accident rather than an inevitability is to invalidate human
“arrogance” and “self-importance.” It is to overturn the consoling fiction that human
beings are special and somehow different from nature. This idea, that the notion of
specialness is ultimately only a comforting illusion, is one of the core narratives of
modern humanism.
Other attempts to counter or disprove progressivism are equally problematic. In
Darwinism and Its Discontents, Michael Ruse comments on the oft-discussed “arms
61

Stephen Jay Gould, “The Evolution of Life on Earth” in The Richness of Life: The
Essential Stephen Jay Gould, 220
33

race” argument, which claims that evolutionary progress is possible when one line
improves and another improves in tandem to keep up. Darwin thought that such
competition would promote bigger brains and eventually human beings. Ruse disagrees:
. . .Even if arms races are all-powerful and prevalent, there is no obvious
reason to think that (in the animal world) they will lead to humans…brains
are very expensive items to maintain. As guerilla warriors show us only
too painfully today, often one can do more in war with light and relatively
inexpensive weapons than with high-priced, complex equipment.62
Ruse ends the section with—what else?—a quote from Gould about the extreme
unlikelihood of human consciousness. And like Gould, his retort to Darwinian biological
progressivism is firmly planted within the Darwinist framework. He does not take up how
the arms race theory envisions progress as intrinsically the product of competition with
one’s enemies, and what sort of ethical implications this might have. Rather, his problem
with the theory is that it doesn’t account for the sheer biological inconvenience of brains.
That being said, Ruse is very concerned elsewhere with the philosophical implications of
evolution and Darwinism. But when discussing the issue of progress, he too takes it as a
given that humans are, as Darwin wrote, different from animals in degree but not in kind.
Such an argument is fundamentally Darwinian because it evaluates human
attributes—our big, unwieldy, and unreliable brains, for instance—solely in terms of the
biological advantage they confer on survival. (After all, it is only in the context of
Darwinism that a statement like “brains are very expensive items to maintain” would
even make sense.) And while the products of the human brain—culture, art, literature,
religion, for example—may strike us as wondrous or majestic or beautiful, they are only
byproducts of its true goal of keeping us alive and propagating our genes. The Darwinist

62

Michael Ruse, Darwinism and Its Discontents, 200
34

worldview, centered as it is on the idea of natural selection as the force that governs all, is
necessarily totalizing. That which does not fit into its worldview is either discounted as
anomaly or devalued via materialist explanations.
One instance in which this materialist reduction is apparent concerns the issue of
altruism, which has always been a problem in Darwinism and evolutionary biology
because it challenges natural selection’s dictate that all living things act only in their selfinterest. The term “altruism,” as Marilynne Robinson notes, was originally coined by
Auguste Comte, the father of positivism, who used the word altruisme in French to mean
“a selfless devotion to the welfare of others which was to fill the place of belief in God
left empty by the triumph of scientific positivism.”63 When used in everyday language,
both altruism and selfishness imply an agent who can act either in accordance with their
self-interest or against it, and who can be held responsible for this action.
Evolutionary biologists, in contrast, use the terms altruism and selfishness to
characterize behavior purely according to cost-benefit analysis. An entity is said to be
acting altruistically if it behaves in such a way as to increase another entity’s chances for
survival at the expense of its own, whereas selfish behavior has the opposite effect. From
the perspective of evolutionary biology, the “problem” of altruism has to do with how a
trait can survive if it causes the organism to behave in a way that makes it less likely to
leave descendants. In this context altruism and selfishness are ostensibly divorced from
their moral connotations; they are purely metaphors, helpful for the purposes of
describing and understanding biological events.

63

Marilynne Robinson, Absence of Mind: The Dispelling of Inwardness from the
Modern Myth of the Self, 42
35

Richard Dawkins’ The Selfish Gene, a major text on natural selection that applies
the theory at the level of genes, relies heavily on such descriptive metaphors. He clarifies
that the definitions of altruism and selfishness in this context are “behavioral, not
subjective” and adds that he is not concerned with “the psychology of motives,” meaning
that he is not going to argue about whether altruistic behavior is actually the result of
secret or subconscious selfish motives.64 But Dawkins’ oft-repeated disclaimer that he is
only speaking in metaphor allows him to make sweeping and often provocative
statements about the supposed selfishness of genes while at the same time claiming that
he is speaking purely from a scientific point of view. Such “metaphors” include the
assertion that “a predominant quality to be expected in a gene is ruthless selfishness,”65
the statement that “as far as a gene is concerned, its alleles are its deadly rivals,”66 or the
particularly vivid proclamation that the gene “leaps from body to body down the
generations, manipulating body after body in its own way and for its own ends,
abandoning a succession of mortal bodies before they sink in senility and death.”67
Throughout the book, Dawkins uses language that implies some sort of agency, if
not a full-fledged, deliberate maliciousness, on the part of the gene. He gives the genes
consciousness and calls it metaphor so as to maintain the guise of objective science, when
in fact his arguments, though he will not admit it, make moral claims about the nature of
existence at all levels of life. In his article “In Defense of Selfish Genes,” Dawkins,
defending his work and its language, states once again that he was not interested in the

64

Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene, 4
Ibid., 2
66 Ibid., 40
67 Ibid., 36
65

36

“emotional nature” of man.68 And yet one of the most striking passages in The Selfish
Gene reads:
Brought up as we have been on the ‘good of the species’ view of
evolution, we naturally think first of liars and deceivers as belonging to
different species: predators, parasites, and so on. However, we must
expect lies and deceit, and selfish exploitation of communication to arise
whenever the interests of the genes of different individuals diverge. This
will include individuals of the same species. As we shall see, we must
even expect that children will deceive their parents, that husbands will
cheat on wives, and that brother will lie to brother.69
While the passage does not refer to “human beings” by name, it does not seem
unreasonable to infer that “husbands and wives” is not a description of gene or animal
relationships. Again, Dawkins’ description escapes its own metaphoric confines and
becomes an attack on the moral nature of human beings. That we must “expect lies and
deceit” whenever the interests of individuals conflict is a statement that implies a
particular assumption about the way the world works and the impossibility of ethical
relationships within it. In endowing material entities with agency, Dawkins dissolves
human agency in the process. Selfishness becomes a general rule that the actor, who is
not only not in control of their actions but unaware of this fact, is powerless to resist.
One way in which altruism has been made workable and comprehensible in the
Darwinian paradigm is the introduction of the idea of group selection, which proposes
that alleles—a particular form of a gene or group of genes—become fixed in a population
regardless of the effects on individuals because of the benefit they confer to the group.70
Though group selection has been rejected by most contemporary evolutionary biologists,
Wilson has in recent years become one of the main champions of the theory. In On
68

Richard Dawkins, “In Defense of Selfish Genes,” 556-557
Dawkins, The Selfish Gene, 69-70
70 Steven Mithen, “How Fit Is E.O. Wilson’s Evolution?”
69

37

Human Nature, which is one of his earlier works, he occupies a strange middle ground,
seeming to equate altruism with group selection and thus acknowledging that altruism is
“possible” while at the same time stating that humans are individually driven. Both of
these contentions are made ostensibly as a scientist, but, more accurately, simply as an
external observer. Because Wilson equates altruism with group selection, he is then able
to argue, in lively prose, that altruism is the “enemy of civilization” because it encourages
human beings to fight and die for their ethnic and nationalistic ties. “True selfishness,” he
writes, “if obedient to the other constraints of mammalian biology, is the key to a more
nearly perfect social contract.” 71 Like Dawkins, Wilson claims to adopt a purely
scientific conception of altruism and selfishness but then uses these words to make moral
claims.
Wilson’s argument is at best counterintuitive and at worst ridiculous, but the
perpetual tendency of Wilson to hugely overstate his case reveals two assumptions
implicitly underlying his writing on altruism that must be recognized. First, by aligning
altruism with group selection, Wilson and others have shown that even the most selfless
behavior is done in the interest of expecting some sort of return–if not for the individual,
then for the group. Writes Robinson, “It is a persistent characteristic of the school of
thought called Darwinism to resist finding a biological basis for true social behavior, that
is, behavior designed to exploit the benefits and satisfactions of attending to collective
well-being, of valuing others irrespective of issues of survival.”72 Both Wilson and
Dawkins may be intending to evaluate the question of whether altruism is biologically
possible or advantageous, but what they end up doing (Wilson explicitly and Dawkins
71
72

E.O. Wilson, On Human Nature, 157
Marilynne Robinson, The Death of Adam, 62
38

implicitly) is condemning altruism as a value entirely ill-fitting with human nature.
Dawkins may end his book by saying that it is possible that humans are the only animals
capable of rebelling against the “tyranny” of genes, but he has spent an entire book
constructing a framework in which self-interest dictates all and “survival machines”
(humans included) exploit and deceive at every opportunity for the sake of survival.
What is most striking about the perspective being presented by both scientists,
though, is the implication–or sometimes even the explicit statement–that we do not and
cannot know our “real” motives, that the world of genes and traits that dictates how we
act is almost entirely unknown to our conscious minds. There is a part in On Human
Nature in which Wilson is attempting to spell out the difficulties of determining whether
or not religion has a materialist basis discernable through science. One such difficulty is
the deceptive nature of religiously-motivated behavior, for, as Wilson informs us, “the
key learning rules and the ultimate, genetic motivation are probably hidden from the
conscious mind, because religion is above all the process by which individuals are
persuaded to subordinate their immediate self-interest to the interests of the group.”73 As
even Wilson admits that religion often inspires behavior that seems to directly contradict
his narrow framework, one possible response could be to question the usefulness—and
indeed, the accuracy—of Wilson’s characterization of human behavior as essentially selfinterested. Instead, Wilson declares that it is our interpretation of the behavior as
altruistic that is wrong, that the actual and necessarily biological motives are concealed
from us but are nonetheless extremely powerful and present. Meaning: the behavior
contradicts the theory, so the behavior must be false.

73

E.O. Wilson, On Human Nature, 176
39

Such self-serving logic only serves to point to the fact that altruism only becomes
a “problem” that must be explained when we stop taking seriously human justifications
for actions as explained by the actors themselves. Darwinism does not only show the
evolutionary origins and biological causes of human traits and behaviors, but posits that
the secrets of the human mind lie in these programmed predispositions. This assumption,
that human beings can be not only described but understood in biological terms, is not
just a small subset of evolutionary thinking. Both sociobiology and evolutionary
psychology rely heavily on this idea and, as George Levine observes, “continue to
develop a single strain of Darwinian thought, which, though it has been present from the
start, is fundamentally mechanistic, assumes the absolute primacy of empirical and
rational choice, and moves if not toward biological determinism at least to a view that all
the aspects of human behavior can be largely explained by biology.”74
Evolution, when it is regarded as the primary means of understanding human
existence, becomes a means for making claims about value. Darwin and the progressivist
Darwinists adopt this lens explicitly, conceiving of human existence as the culmination of
evolutionary development while allowing for the possibility of further biological
improvement. But even the more careful Darwinists, like Ruse and Gould, proceed
according to a framework in which human existence is evaluated in biological terms, as
Gould casts the development of higher consciousness as an insignificant cosmic accident
and Ruse addresses human attributes according to how useful they are for biological
development. In the Darwinist account of evolution, the theory of natural selection
becomes the key to understanding human life, providing a totalizing framework
74

George Levine, Darwin Loves You: Natural Selection and the Re-Enchantment of the
World, 57
40

according to which all aspects of human behavior, even altruism, can be evaluated and
explained. But as Robinson writes, human beings, whatever evil they may do, have a
“singular dignity as creatures who can act freely, outside the tedious limits of our own
interests.”75 In conceiving of all action as finally reducible to self-interest, Darwinism
thus discounts the very capability that distinguishes human beings from animals.
Richard Dawkins begins his book The Blind Watchmaker with the provocation,
“This book is written in the conviction that our own existence once presented the greatest
of all mysteries, but it is a mystery no longer because it is solved. Darwin and Wallace
solved it.”76 Though few would be as bold as to use those words exactly, this is the
implicit claim of Darwinism: that evolution provided a final explanation for human
beings on the earth, thus displacing human existence as a subject of inquiry or
contemplation. While we may wonder at the complexity of the human being, this
complexity is still finally reducible to evolutionarily developed matter that does not
reflect any sort of meaning or purpose, nor does mind have access to any sort of larger
reality. Though Darwinists like Dawkins may not acknowledge it, these are metaphysical
claims, not the indisputable teachings of evolution. And as metaphysical claims, they rest
on a reductive understanding of the universe that circumscribes, rather than furthers, any
meaningful understanding of the place of human beings within it.

75
76

Marilynne Robinson, The Death of Adam, 26
Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, xiii
41

III. Recognizing the Crisis: Rowan Williams and Hannah Arendt
Today Darwinism has become almost synonymous with modern humanism.
Stephen Jay Gould, Richard Dawkins, and E.O. Wilson are all past recipients of the
Humanist of the Year award, which is given by the American Humanist Association to
“recognize a person of national or international reputation who, through the application
of humanist values, has made a significant contribution to the improvement of the human
condition.”77 The modern humanist worldview has become popularized through the work
of these thinkers—particularly Wilson and Dawkins—and they have come to play key
roles in the contemporary debate about whether science and religion are intrinsically at
odds. To some extent, it is through this debate that modern humanism has played out,
with both sides putting forward reductive understandings of both science and religion.
In this chapter I will look at two thinkers, one secular and one theological, who
have risen above this debate and recognized the real issue at hand: the question of
whether we can preserve an idea of human dignity in a secular age. The first thinker is
Rowan Williams, the former Archbishop of Canterbury, who has thought extensively
about secularism and the role of religion in the contemporary world. The second thinker
is the twentieth century political philosopher Hannah Arendt, who recognized how
modern science was coming to redefine the human condition and alienate human beings
from the world. Despite the vast differences between their respective discourses—
Christian theology, in the case of Williams, and political philosophy, in the case of
Arendt—both Williams and Arendt recognized the crisis of humanism and attempted to
re-envision an understanding of human dignity for the contemporary world.
77

“Humanists of the Year,” Website of the American Humanist Association
42

Both Williams and Arendt recognize the need for some sort of language of
transcendence to describe human beings. For Williams, however, this language is
necessarily religious rather than political in character. He argues that it is only a religious
concept of the person, with its recognition of the inalienable dignity of human beings
based on their shared relationship with God, that can ground and richen a secular politics.
The last lines of Williams’ essay “Secularism, Faith, and Freedom” in Faith in the Public
Square encapsulate his sense of the necessity of religion in today’s world:
The struggle for a right balance of secular process and public religious
debate is part of a wider struggle for a concept of the personal that is
appropriately robust and able to withstand the pressures of a functionalist
and reductionist climate. . .without this dimension, the liberal ideal
becomes deeply anti-humanist. And, like it or not, we need a theology to
arrest this degeneration.78
In Williams’ understanding, secularism as it has been achieved fluctuates between two
models: procedural secularism, in which the state oversees a variety of religious
communities but does not privilege any one group or system over another; and
programmatic secularism, in which religious faith must be entirely confined to the private
sphere and subordinated to one’s loyalty to the state. Though it is the latter type of
secularism that Williams takes issue with, he is also contesting the virtue of what could
be called the character of the secular, which proceeds from the assumption that decisions
and attitudes pertaining to life in the public realm cannot be determined by factors that
reference any presence or agency beyond the tangible.79 The first problem with this
assumption, Williams suggests, is that it rules out of public discourse what for many
people are their strongest motivations and deepest convictions. To the extent that these

78
79

Rowan Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 36
Ibid., 12
43

convictions are expressed, they must be removed from the religious context that often
gives evaluative or moral language its weight.
The second problem with the secularist ideal, in which public life is emptied of all
references to the non-tangible, is that it results in a kind of functionalism where the social
sphere is evaluated according to how successful everyone is in achieving their aims
without harming others. Although the secular society rarely operates quite so neatly in
reality, the predominant understanding of secularism nonetheless implies “that the
definitive ‘currency’ of the public realm is to do with calculation about functions: I or we
begin with the aims that we are out to realize; the other participants in the social or public
process are understood in terms of how they further or obstruct those aims.” The opposite
of secularism, Williams writes, would therefore be “the resolve to regard the
environment, human and non-human, as more than instrumental.”80 By making religious
faith an entirely private matter, necessarily separate from one’s role as a citizen, we
deprive public life of non-instrumental perspectives that regard societal relations as more
than just contests of power and assertions of will.
The relationship between secular modernity and modern religion is made more
complex, however, by the fact that religion itself has assimilated to the secular
framework and even reinforced it in the form of fundamentalism. In our times, religious
faith is often understood as a matter of affirming propositions that determine what is
acceptable and unacceptable behavior. This emphasis on propositional faith shows how
religious utterance itself has been enfolded into the functionalist or instrumentalist
framework; its purpose is no longer to reflect upon meaning or to shape how self and

80

Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 13
44

world are sensed but to solve problems and make prescriptions. Secularized religion is
also representative for Williams of a reemerging urge within Christian history to
understand God’s seeing and knowing of the world as a “maximal accumulating of
information,” a single and absolute vantage point from which historical closure can be
claimed.81 Following from this understanding is the assumption that the will of God can
then be known, understood, and prescribed. Secularized religion, Williams writes, thus
ceases “to give priority to the sense that God’s seeing of the world and the self is very
strictly incommensurable with any specific human perspective, and is in danger of
evacuating religious language of the pressure to take time to learn its meaning.”82 This
type of faith, which he calls “forgetful religion,” becomes translated during the
Enlightenment into worldly terms and enfolded within secularism as the idea that there is
“a ‘seeing’ of the world from some vantage point within it that leaves no room for any
seeing from elsewhere.”83
Along with the supposition that there is a final seeing and knowing of the world
that exhausts all others, the character of the secular is also inseparable from liberal
individualism, embodied for Williams in the thinking of Isaiah Berlin and the counterEnlightenment thinkers he was concerned with. In Two Concepts of Liberty, Berlin makes
a distinction between positive liberty, which arises in a society where government
attempts to promote a particular agenda on the basis of certain ideas about what a free
individual looks like, and negative liberty, where government allows a maximum level of

81

Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 18
Ibid., 6
83 Ibid., 15
82

45

individual choice and does not attempt to set moral priorities for society.84 Berlin rejected
positive liberty on the basis of his belief that a government that seeks to enact a positive
project is always in danger of becoming totalitarian—by presuming that there is a
universal rationality that can be recognized and taught, there is always the potential that
the state will attempt to seek out and destroy the “irrational” elements of society.
However, the principle of negative liberty that Berlin proposes instead is equally
problematic in that it ends up foregoing the possibility of social unity entirely, asserting
that a society in which individual rights are observed is the best that can be hoped for. If a
society predicated on enlightenment rationality is too politically dangerous, the society
modeled on Berlin’s liberal realism risks reducing the human person “to an economic
unit, a solitary accumulator of rights, comforts and securities.”85 It leads, finally, to a
simplified understanding of political freedom, predicated on the assumption that all social
relations can be understood as contests of power between atomized individuals.
This notion of power as the lens through which all human action can be finally
evaluated demonstrates the inherent corruptibility of the liberal secularist ideal. In his
introduction to a book of compiled essays entitled Theology and the Political, Williams
comments on the “implicit nihilism” in the idea that meaningful action can be reduced to
successful assertion of the individual will on the external world—a nihilism that hides in
many modern and postmodern philosophies, theologies, and social projects. “To the
extent that popular liberal and pluralist thought assumes with blithe unawareness a basic
model of meaningful action in terms of assertion,” he remarks, “it assumes a final social

84
85

Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 21
Ibid., 36
46

unintelligibility, an ultimate inability to make sense of each other’s actions.”86
Christianity rejects this defining of action in terms of assertion, offering instead a notion
of meaningful action as that which foregoes the assertion of will and power and in doing
so contributes to a system of communication. The most radical and revisionary example
of such action, action as testimony, is the crucifixion of Jesus Christ.87
In opposition to the instrumentalist and individualist character of secularism,
Williams argues for the indispensability of the “non-secular,” a sort of “imaginative
awareness” that acknowledges in all moments the possibility of other perspectives, other
ways of seeing the world. The non-secular, he writes, “is, foundationally, a willingness to
see things or other persons as the objects of another sensibility than my own, perhaps
another sensibility than our own…The point is that what I am aware of, I am aware of in
significant dimensions not defined by my awareness.”88 To be aware in this sense is to
affirm that the human and non-human world always eludes a final explanation or
objective account, to strive to see all things “in the light of someone’s (actual or possible)
love.”89 In terms of the state, this sort of awareness translates into the acceptance that it
does not hold a totalized authority over all aspects of life, that its power is not the only or
the ultimate sanction, and that the public good is not only a matter of balancing selfinterest and negotiating practical goods. When Williams talks about the necessity of the
non-secular in the political realm, he does not mean that the state should endorse
religious doctrine or align itself with one religious perspective. He means, rather, that the
state should be willing to promote debate about public policies not only in terms of how
86

Williams, Introduction to Theology and the Political, 2
Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 2-3
88 Ibid., 13
89 Ibid., 18
87

47

they serve particular ends, but also in terms of what sort of society they foster and what
kind of human agent they nurture. What is lacking in the liberal political culture is “some
picture of human flourishing that is not reducible to a fairly peaceful adjustment of
competing individual needs.”90
At the core of this idea of the non-secular is a conception of the human person
that transcends both the Enlightenment and counter-Enlightenment paradigms. Williams
recognizes that we cannot define human beings in terms of capacities, whether rational or
moral, because such definitions risk excluding particular people or groups that are
deemed to not fit these conditions. Nor can we think of human beings solely in terms of
their individual needs and desires, as disconnected parts of a society inevitably ruled by
conflicts of interest. In other words, what is needed is a conception of human dignity that
reflects the sense of belonging that gives meaning to human life, the way in which human
identity is always contingent upon membership within a community.
Williams writes that in order to ground human dignity, “something more than
biology is required, some imagined community of universal recognition; and that is what
faith proposes, in various forms, but always steering us towards the realization that we
are recognizable to each other because we are first recognized (affirmed, valued, loved)
by God.”91 As soon as we recognize the fact of human responsibility, the way in which
each person not only belongs to and is seen by a community but is ultimately answerable
to this community in some fundamental way, we are implicitly acknowledging the sense
of being given something by another—that “something is bestowed which both enables

90
91

Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 119
Ibid., 123
48

and requires an answer.”92 It is not possible, Williams argues, to speak about nor fully
acknowledge this act of bestowal without suggesting some sort of “initiating agency” that
is independent of our world.93 Human dignity thus becomes, in a Christian conception,
grounded in what Williams refers to as the “not chosen dimension of our reality,” the way
in which God has already bestowed upon us and taken responsibility for our lives.94
This idea of human selfhood as constituted by God’s ontologically prior seeing of
the world is crucial for thinking about human rights, as it implies that there is a level of
human selfhood that can never be made subject to another person’s will, or to a human
system of power. According to Williams, the impossibility of absolute control or ultimate
ownership of human beings is evident from the way Christianity conceives of the human
body. In his essay “Do Human Rights Exist?” Williams discusses the New Testament’s
brief treatment of the topic of slavery, arguing that the baptismal relationship is
understood as severely complicating the slave-owner’s relationship to the slave. “The
slave is no longer simply the property of the master or mistress,” he writes, “but
‘belongs’ to the one divine Master and is ultimately answerable to him, in exactly the
same way as is the Christian slave-owner.”95 While the idea that the master had no power
over the mind of the slave was made commonplace by Stoic writers such as Seneca,
Christian doctrine suggests that not only the mind but the body are incapable of being
owned by another person—not because I have an ultimate ownership over my body, but
because “the whole idea of ownership is inappropriate.”96 The body, at least in the

92

Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 9
Ibid., 158
94 Ibid.
95 Ibid., 151
96 Ibid., 152
93

49

tradition of Thomas Aquinas, is not strictly separable from the soul; it is the means of
subjectivity and communication that enables one a place within human discourse.
Williams goes on to suggest that a Christian conception of human rights would recognize
the human body as the locus of human identity, selfhood, and communication.
This idea of the “not chosen” is for Williams the only way of conceiving of
human dignity in a way that is non-negotiable. To acknowledge the inalienable dignity of
another person, he writes, is “to admit that there is something about them that is, so to
speak, beyond me: something to which my individual purposes, preferences, fears, or
hopes, are irrelevant.”97 It is to recognize their standing before their maker, a standing
that is always “completely unaffected by any particular way in which things turn out in
the history of the world.”98 There is no possibility of human action bringing about a final
or optimal state of affairs, and likewise no possibility of human perfectibility. But neither
is it the case that we can declare human fallibility to be the ultimate rule of human
relations and achievement. In the Abrahamic religions, there is a final state of affairs
which we can apprehend if not achieve absolutely, an eschatological point of reference.
Although human beings cannot anticipate the judgment of God, they can practice
commitment to the welfare of others. The fact that God recognizes and loves us allows us
to trust that mutual recognition and love among human beings is possible, that human
relations transcend power dynamics.
Though Hannah Arendt was a secular thinker, Williams’ idea of the “not chosen”
is reminiscent of what she calls in The Origins of Totalitarianism the “mysterious

97
98

Williams, Faith in the Public Square, 171
Ibid., 122
50

background of mere givenness.”99 An integral, and oft-overlooked, concept in her
philosophy, givenness is that which precedes our belonging to a world; it is that which we
cannot change about ourselves and that makes us unique and different from others.
Although Arendt believes contribution to the human artifice and participation in the
public realm to be essential to human life, her conception of man as a necessarily political
being arises directly from her idea of the “givenness” of man, how he exists simply by
virtue of being born into the world. Each person is the result of their actions and speech
in the public realm, but they are also their natural, unchangeable characteristics that come
from nature, including their immutable finitude.
Arendt believed that the desire to escape this mysterious condition of givenness
was a desire unique to the modern world, and she thought that this rebellion against what
is given and unchangeable about human existence was changing the human condition
itself. One of the key passages where Arendt talks about givenness is in The Origins of
Totalitarianism, when she is discussing the loss of human rights:
The more highly developed a civilization, the more accomplished the
world it has produced, the more at home men feel within the human
artifice - the more they will resent everything they have not produced,
everything that is merely and mysteriously given them. . .This mere
existence, that is, all that which is mysteriously given us by birth and
which includes the shape of our bodies and the talents of our minds, can
be adequately dealt with only by the unpredictable grace of love, which
says with Augustine, 'Volo ut sis (I want you to be),' without being able to
give any particular reason for such supreme and unsurpassable
affirmation.
For both Arendt and Williams, the recognition of the not chosen, or the given, is the root
of gratitude, an affirmation that anchors human existence. But Arendt also recognizes the
implicit danger that accompanies givenness in the modern age, the way in which it
99

Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, 301
51

represents both the essence of what it means to be human and the bareness of mere
existence. Man now wants to deny his dark background of givenness because it reminds
him of the limits to his power, and thus becomes an infuriating obstacle in his bid for
total domination of his world. She later develops this idea in the preface to The Human
Condition, in which she observes twentieth century man’s terrifying rebellion against
existence as it has been given to him; soon, she predicts, man may be possessed by a wish
“to exchange this gift for something he has made himself.”100 Man may soon be at the
mercy of his own abilities, eventually conceiving of his own givenness as a handicap to
be defeated and nature as an obstruction to the power that he is able to assert unfailingly
in all other aspects of life.
Though givenness is what enables the condition of plurality, Arendt believed that
to be truly human each individual must seek to transcend his mere givenness and act and
speak within the public realm. Indeed, her idea of the right to have rights, which means
the right “to live in a framework where one is judged by one’s actions and opinions,” is
directly related to the inherent publicness of individuals.101 Each individual, finding
themselves in a plurality with others, must leave the private realm and engage in the
public realm, the realm of appearance and the sphere in which human beings act in
concert as equals. While human dignity is intrinsically related to givenness in Arendt’s
conceptions, rights are contingent upon belonging to a community. “Man, it turns out,
can lose all so-called Rights of Man without losing his essential quality as man, his

100
101

Arendt, The Human Condition, 2-3
Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, 297
52

human dignity,” writes Arendt in the Origins. “Only the loss of a polity itself expels him
from humanity.”102
Unlike Williams, Arendt did not think that Christian faith, or religion in general,
could ground this essential belonging to a political community in the modern age; she
thought that the rise of Christianity had, along with the Socratic elevation of theoretical
contemplation over political engagement, displaced man from the inherently shared
world. Christianity elevated citizenship within the kingdom of God over worldly political
citizenship; it envisioned the world as only a provisional home for human beings.
Secularism had then further divorced human beings from the world, rather than bringing
them back to it. Writes Arendt in The Human Condition:
Whatever the word ‘secular’ is meant to signify in current usage,
historically it cannot possibly be equated with worldliness; modern man at
any rate did not gain this world when he lost the other world, and he did
not gain life, strictly speaking, either; he was thrust back upon it, thrown
into the closed inwardness of introspection, where the highest he could
experience were the empty processes of reckoning of the mind, its play
with itself.103
For Arendt, the loss of faith that characterized the modern age was not religious in origin,
nor did it only affect religious belief. Rather, it was part of a profound and far-reaching
philosophical shift in the way human experience was perceived—“an attempt to reduce
all experiences, with the world as well as with other human beings, to experiences
between man and himself.”104
That human beings had gained a deep interiority but lost the common world was
part of what constituted, for Arendt, the crisis of humanism and the loss of an idea of

102

Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, 297
Arendt, The Human Condition, 320
104 Ibid., 254
103

53

humanity. Her work traced the genealogy of this loss; it also was, in essence, a response
to it, an argument for why we must hold onto a sense of the exceptionality of human
beings. She believed that without a sense of the dignity and uniqueness of human beings,
there is nothing stopping us from destroying human life whenever necessity or ideology
seem to demand it. For Arendt what makes human beings unique is that we can build a
world that outlasts us, a world in which we can speak and act, be seen and be heard.
Thus, one manifestation of the crisis of humanism and the loss of human exceptionalism
was what Arendt called earth and world alienation, that is, the erosion of that which
makes the world into a shared home for human beings.
The concept of world in Arendt’s philosophy refers to the artifice that humans
erect and dwell in upon the earth. For Arendt the world is not only the tangible product of
human hands over many generations, but also the collective sense of reality amongst
human beings that endures over time. When human beings actively belong to the
common world they are devoted to its preservation and care, dedicated to the well-being
of the whole over one’s private concerns. To be alienated from the world is thus to be
alienated from this process of self-transcendence by which human beings find their place
within a human community. In The Human Condition Arendt discusses three major
events that contributed to the world alienation of the modern age: the discovery of
America and the subsequent exploration and surveying of the entire earth, the
expropriation of ecclesiastical property during the Protestant Reformation, and the
invention of the telescope, the advent of modern science.105

105

Arendt, The Human Condition, 248
54

The first of these events—the exploration and mapping of the earth, beginning
with the European discovery of the New World—contributed to world alienation in that it
required the explorer or surveyor to inhabit a detached vantage point divorced from his
immediate surroundings. Writes Arendt, “It is in the nature of the human surveying
capacity that it can function only if man disentangles himself from all involvement in and
concern with the close at hand and withdraws himself to a distance from everything near
him.”106 Such a perspective, like the view from an airplane window, provokes a
remarkable shift in perception. At such a distance, a sense of the particularities of human
life begins to recede. The human world appears no longer as an indelible and meaningful
reality; instead, it resembles the work of insects against an immense landscape.
Although the cartographer’s perspective is not in itself intrinsically harmful, it
foreshadows how the perspective of the disengaged and dispassionate observer threatens
to diminish the significance of what is being observed. As Michael H. McCarthy points
out in The Political Humanism of Hannah Arendt, “if human beings and events are
judged politically by the way they appear, then the standpoint of the earthly mapmaker is
fundamentally anti-political. For there is nothing in the appearances granted from on high
to indicate the dignity and importance of what he observes.”107 The voyages of
exploration in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries metaphorically shrink the earth,
enabling human beings to grasp its scale and take possession of its landscape in a new
and profound way. But their discoveries also enable simultaneously a detachment from
the earth, a metaphorical distancing from the immediate reality of the world.

106
107

Ibid., 251
Michael J. McCarthy, The Political Humanism of Hannah Arendt, 84
55

The second world-alienating event that Arendt names is the expropriation of
church and peasant property during the Protestant Reformation. The significance of this
event for Arendt lay in her belief in the importance, even the sacredness, of private
property. In order to freely enter the public realm and engage with the world, human
beings need a “privately owned share in the world,” a place to retreat to that is not subject
to the gaze and demands of the public sphere.”108 The deprivation of certain groups of
their property thus deprived them of their tangible place in the world and was one of the
main factors that contributed to the collapse of the separation between the public and
private realms.
For Arendt, the devaluing of private property, evident in the expropriation of
peasant land and the subsequent breakdown of the feudal system, was the beginning of
the modern culture of consumption. The impact of this event, she writes, “propelled
Western mankind into a development in which all property was destroyed in the process
of its appropriation, all things devoured in the process of their production, and the
stability of the world undermined in a constant process of change.”109 The modern
capitalist economy that arose following the Protestant Reformation was made possible
only through a new impetus towards unceasing accumulation of wealth and unlimited
material production. In this new system, things are made in order to be consumed and
used up rather than to serve as lasting contributions to the human artifice. The worldly
ideal of conservation is lost to an endless cycle of production, in which “the evaluative
priority has clearly shifted from the objective worth of the thing made to the relentless

108
109

Arendt, The Human Condition, 257
Ibid., 252
56

expansion of the thing itself.”110 Human beings in the modern age become alienated from
the world because they are no longer invested in its preservation; indeed, the very
functioning of the economic system requires the destruction of worldly objects.
The third and most significant event of world alienation—and, for Arendt, the
decisive event of the modern age—was the invention of the telescope. She observes in
The Human Condition that it was Galileo who actually proved what Descartes only
articulated: that our senses, “our very organs for the reception of reality,” cannot be
trusted to tell us anything true about the world.111 The fact that the telescope could show
us that which our senses could not meant that our senses should be displaced as our
primary means of learning about the world. It became understood that what our senses
tell us is, if not outright wrong, at least not as valuable as what can be learned from the
instruments we create. Although mathematicians as well as philosophers had challenged
the geocentric model prior to Galileo’s discovery, Galileo was the first to “put within the
grasp of an earth-bound creature and its body-bound senses what had seemed forever
beyond his reach, at best open to the uncertainties of speculation and imagination.”112
Once our worldly senses are no longer the means of perceiving what is ‘real’, we begin to
wish for a point in the universe outside the earth—the “Archimedean point”—from which
to view and handle nature.
Arendt thought that the invention of the telescope marked the beginning of the
separation of human beings from the earth, and of modern science from humanity and
human concerns. The cartographer’s position of detachment from his surroundings

110

McCarthy, The Political Humanism of Hannah Arendt, 85
Arendt, The Human Condition, 262
112 Ibid., 260
111

57

became radicalized in a new and “universal” science of nature that always regards earthly
existence as relative and earthly perspective as untrustworthy. This universal science is
used not only to master nature, which had been possible before, but to import “cosmic
processes into nature even at the obvious risk of destroying her, and, with her, man’s
mastership over her.”113 In fact, modern science derives its very integrity from this
“carelessness” that subordinates all other concerns—the place of man and the earth in the
universe for example, or the very survival of mankind itself—to its primary task, the
search for objectivity and truth.114
As McCarthy observes, part of what makes modern science’s aspiration towards
an absolute knowledge of the universe so threatening for Arendt is that it cannot
remained confined within the boundaries of science, but instead begins to influence and
shape the realm of politics as well. But the perspective of the citizen, unlike that of the
scientist, is always “intrinsically limited.” Each citizen seeks to overcome this limitation
not by ascending to an objective standpoint and rejecting the world as it appears to him or
her, but by freely exchanging opinions with other citizens. The scientific valuing of
absolute knowledge, its rejection of the citizen’s relative standpoint, thus endangers the
plurality of perspectives upon which politics depends.115 Galileo’s theory of knowledge,
when applied to the political realm, becomes a totalizing ideology, proposing that there is
one perspective that exhausts all others and renders dialogue unnecessary or futile.
If Galileo’s invention of the telescope marked the crucial turning point in the
development of modern science, then Descartes offered the modern philosophical

113

Ibid., 268
Arendt, “The Conquest of Space,” 48
115 McCarthy, The Political Humanism of Hannah Arendt, 88

114

58

response to this discovery, as he conceptualized the scientific doubt of the senses as a
principle pertaining to all human perception. Although Descartes, unlike Galileo,
retreated into subjectivism rather than seek objectivity, his thought proceeded from the
same starting point: that what appears to our earthly selves and human faculties is
ultimately a deception. The fundamental doubt thus completely eclipsed the old
philosophical opposition between sensual and rational truth, for it was grounded in the
belief that truth and reality do not actually show themselves to human beings at all. The
pervasive idea of pagan, Hebrew, and Christian antiquity—that Being opens itself to
human beings and that we are able to receive and understand it—was lost, only to be
replaced by a radical doubting of reality that assumes that it is only through doing away
with appearances entirely that we can hope to discover true knowledge.116
Once doubt becomes the only thing of which one can be certain, any
contemplation of the external world becomes fundamentally a confrontation with oneself.
Human beings no longer have a world in common because their perceptual awareness of
it is always suspect; what we apprehend no longer reflects upon the qualities of the world
but upon the structure of our minds. In Descartes’ account of human consciousness,
“each finite subject is confined to a private space of appearances from whose objective
contents all other persons are excluded.”117 The detached and anti-political perspective of
the scientific observer thus finds its parallel within the Cartesian disembodied ego, which
exists in a state of perpetually private awareness, utterly deprived of a common world
shared with other human beings.

116
117

Arendt, The Human Condition, 274-6
McCarthy, The Political Humanism of Hannah Arendt, 90
59

What is decided with the rise of modern science and philosophy is that our minds
as they were given to us do not have access to anything larger than ourselves. There is no
sense that human beings are privileged in their relation to the world or that we fit in some
essential way into the world that we live in. Rather, the fact that the universe is
intelligible to human beings means only that we are creatures who happen to be able to
recognize patterns and speculate as to their meaning. Whereas modern science makes the
empirical world the ultimate point of reference while choosing to set aside the mind—or,
through mathematics, passes over appearance entirely and becomes “the science of the
structure of the human mind”—the Cartesian solution is to make the mind the point of
reference rather than the world.118 But both modern science and philosophy only arrive at
a certainty of reality by cutting off human beings from transcendence into a world.
Arendt is much more explicit about what the phenomenon of world alienation
looks like and the challenges it presents than she is about a possible means of resisting
this alienation. Indeed, she does not state clearly that such resistance is even possible,
although she is adamantly opposed to the idea that we can go back to any pre-modern
mentality. But her philosophy as a whole is a subtle but firm rejection of the idea that
hopelessness is the only adequate response to human estrangement from the world.
Although one would be mistaken to think of Arendt as proposing a definite project, one
can nonetheless see in her thought a sense of a possible way forward, a potential means
of combatting the reductive and totalizing spirit of our time. One place in which this
sense of hope or faith is discernible is in her essay “The Crisis of Culture”, when she
discusses the genealogy and meaning of classical humanism.

118

Arendt, The Human Condition, 266
60

In a general sense, Arendt writes, the Roman humanitas named the belief in “the
integrity of the person as person.”119 It was an idea at odds with the sentiment expressed
in the Roman commonplace, Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis aestimanda
veritas, or, “Socrates is dear to me, Plato is dear to me, but the truth is dearer still.” This
statement of Cicero’s seems to suggest that friendship and human worth should be
sacrificed to pursuit of the absolute truth. But there is another saying, Arendt points out,
in which Cicero rejects this idea: Errare mehercule malo cum Platone…quam cua istis
(sc. Pythagoraeis) vera sentire, or “I prefer before heaven to go astray with Plato rather
than hold true views with his opponents.” Arendt’s interpretation of this saying belies a
deeper meaning of humanitas, in which the word connotes an active choosing of the
world over absolute truth:
What Cicero in fact says is that for the true humanist neither the verities of
the scientist nor the truth of the philosopher nor the beauty of the artist can
be absolutes; the humanist, because he is not a specialist, exerts a faculty
of judgment and taste which is beyond the coercion which each specialty
imposes upon us. This Roman humanitas applied to men who were free in
every respect, for whom the question of freedom, of not being coerced,
was the decisive one—even in philosophy, even in science, even in the
arts. Cicero says: In what concerns my association with men and things, I
refuse to be coerced by truth, even by beauty.120
Humanism in this sense belies the understanding that the pursuit of truth becomes hollow
as soon as it forsakes the world. It is the rejection of the closed secular vantage point, in
the language of Williams, or the Archimedean point, in the language of Arendt. The truly
humanistic attitude is thus one that, in the free exercise of judgment and taste, cares for
and takes care of the things of the world and, through this caring, cultivates a love for the
world itself. Humanism is not only a sense of the intrinsic worth of human beings, but
119
120

Arendt, “The Crisis in Culture” in Beyond Past and Future, 224
Arendt, “The Crisis in Culture,” 225
61

also the sense that to be human is to always be engaged with and responsible to the
world.

62

IV. The Humanism of Marilynne Robinson

We have not escaped, nor have we in any sense diminished, the mystery of our existence.
We have only rejected any language that would seem to acknowledge it.
–Marilynne Robinson, “Cosmology”
Few contemporary thinkers are as outspoken in their opposition to the modern
reduction of human beings to knowable entities as the novelist and essayist Marilynne
Robinson. Implicit in this reductionism for Robinson is the belief, arising out of
positivism, that we exist within a narrow reality that can be exhaustively described and
explained. Because this model is made possible only through excluding those structures
of meaning that cannot be grasped through reason, we have come to devalue the very
testimony that would call it into question, namely, the felt experience of consciousness,
of subjectivity and intuition. As a result, the human mind is no longer thought to be able
to see anything truly or to open unto a larger reality. In our desire for certainty, we have
lost the sense of ourselves as essential parts of an infinitely complex order, an order that
we can never fully understand but in which we nonetheless participate.
Robinson considers this closed ontological model to be the corollary of the
positivist rejection of the Western metaphysical and religious traditions. She observes in
Absence of Mind: The Dispelling of the Inwardness from the Modern Myth of the Self that
positivism proceeded from two fundamental assumptions, both of which have remained
largely unchallenged: that science has given us the ability to answer certain essential
questions about the nature of reality and that, as a result, we must exclude from our
model of reality whatever science cannot verify or falsify. These assumptions are in large
part responsible for the accepted notion that there is an intrinsic conflict between science

63

and religion, for religion, so the debate goes, tries to account for phenomena that are now
coming under the purview of science.121 Robinson argues, in response, that this
controversy is founded upon a drastically simplified conception of religion and an
outdated conception of science that bears more in common with the word as it was
understood in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries than with modern physics and
cosmology.122 Science is portrayed within the frame of this debate as a way of
conquering mystery, rather than exploring and grappling with it.
In some sense, this truncated debate has come to stand in for the real conflict at
hand, which is between two radically different approaches to thinking about reality and
human consciousness. Observes Robinson:
The great breach that separates the modern Western world from its
dominant traditions of religion and metaphysics is the prestige of opinion
that throws into question the scale of the reality in which the mind
participates. Does it open on ultimate truth, at least potentially or in
momentary glimpses, or is it an extravagance of nature, brilliantly
complex yet created and radically constrained by its biology and by
cultural influence?123

121

The recent comments of Jim Al-Khalili, the president of the British Humanist
Association, serve as one of countless examples of this sentiment. Writes Al-Khalili
in New Statesman: “As a scientist, I have an unshakeable rationalist conviction that
our universe is comprehensible; that mysteries are mysteries only because we have
yet to figure them out. There is no need for a supernatural being to occupy the gaps
in our understanding, because we will eventually fill them with new knowledge
based on objective scientific truths: answers that are not based on mythologies, or
cultural/historical whims, or personal biases, but arrived at by examining
hypotheses, testing our theories to destruction and being prepared to abandon them
if they conflict with empirical data.” He goes on to say that atheists could afford to be
a little less militant and outspoken in their opposition to religion, for “we are
winning the argument.” (Jim Al-Khalil, “Believing in a God Is Fine By Me”, New
Statesman, March 27, 2013.)
122 Robinson, Absence of Mind, ix-x
123 Ibid., 31
64

In the reductionist scientific understanding, we exist within an objective reality that is
knowable to us as a set of facts; we do participate in this reality in the sense that we can
study it empirically. But reality as it was conceived in the religious and metaphysical
traditions is more than an ever-growing set of facts, more than an amalgamation of
natural processes and laws. It does not necessarily lend itself to being verified or
disproved, as it cannot be fully encapsulated in empirical terms. While empirical
observation and instrumental reasoning do offer one kind of knowledge, these ways of
looking at the world are inherently limited in what they are able to disclose. In conceiving
of knowledge solely in these terms, modern thought has adopted a narrow understanding
of reality that severely limits the role of human beings within it. It has forced out the
fundamental human experience of intuition, the type of “knowing” by which we grasp
our place within a larger reality. That one “feels” oneself to be a part of this reality alerts
us to its existence, even if individuals articulate it in completely different ways, even if its
true essence can never be known.
One of the framing narratives of the reductionist model is that science liberates
humanity from the constraints of religion, replacing illusion with empirical fact. But this
model actually replaces what it dismisses as religious illusion with its own assumptions
about the nature of existence. Robinson writes, “To say there is no aspect of being that
metaphysics can meaningfully address is a metaphysical statement.”124 Any claim about
ultimate reality extends beyond what we can know solely through reason—even if that
claim is that there is nothing to be known that cannot be known through reason. Thus, the
real conflict is not between science and religion but between an understanding of reality

124

Absence of Mind, 34
65

that preserves mystery and an understanding of reality that implies that mystery can be
dispelled and conquered. In one understanding, the mind is “properly an object of
wonder,” sufficient unto itself, indicative of the special status of human beings within the
framework of the universe.125 In the other, the mind is a myth that is gradually being
debunked, a relic of a concept that belongs to a time when we could not study the brain
and learn how it worked.
The idea that science could “disprove” religion or render the questioning it
inspires unnecessary or irrelevant is one of the biggest fallacies underlying the perceived
dichotomy between science and religion. That science, because it furthers our empirical
knowledge of the world, has a privileged position over religion when it comes to making
claims about ultimate meaning is a belief that has flourished because we have come to
equate description with explanation. But being able to describe something does not
necessarily give any insight into the purpose or intention behind the thing described.126
“If the mind is the activity of the brain,” Robinson writes, “this means only that the brain
is capable of such lofty and astonishing things that their expression has been given the
names mind, and soul, and spirit.”127 The purpose of the brain or the meaning of the mind
remains an overwhelming question, an untouched mystery, even as we learn more about
the brain from a biological standpoint. Contrary to the pro-science argument, religion has
not flourished for thousands of years because it helps us to dispel mystery, but because it
is a way of grappling with the fact of mystery itself.

125

“Cosmology,” 58
Ibid., 61
127 Absence of Mind, 112
126

66

For Robinson, wonder and awe at the unknowabilility of the universe, and an
acknowledgement of the infinite richness and meaningfulness of that which cannot be
known, is the essence of a religious frame of perception. Religion rejects the idea that we
can arrive rationally at an account of our reality, or even that we can make a definitive
assertion as to the existence of God. We have no basis in our experience for such a claim,
as “we have no way of knowing the true nature of the reality in which we are immersed,
of the substance of which we are composed.”128 Religious belief is thus not a matter of
affirming particular propositions about the universe. It resides, rather, in the assumptions
that life, whatever its ultimate meaning, has a profound significance, and that human
beings fit into the universe in a miraculous if endlessly mysterious way. Robinson
remarked in an interview that “the feeling of amazement that I think is appropriate to an
alerted sense of what being is leads very naturally to deep comfort with the assumption of
God.”129 Belief does not align with the terms of reason or logic, as if one could stand
outside their experience and assimilate each part into a comprehensible whole. Rather,
the religious believer finds herself immersed in experience, and then tries to find a way of
accounting for it. Thus, the true threat to religion in the modern age is not advancement in
our empirical knowledge, but rather skepticism of the authenticity of our subjective
experience. The worst thing we can do is begin to doubt or call into question the
legitimacy of this experience, to become too caught up in the complications and
difficulties of metaphysical belief.
Perhaps the driving theme of Robinson’s work, the conviction from which the rest
of her thought stems, is the deficiency—or even the plain inaccuracy—of the modern
128
129

Ibid., 57
“Interview: Marilynne Robinson,” Religion and Ethics Newsweekly
67

narrative of disenchantment. Robinson characterizes this narrative differently depending
on the context, but overall she identifies it as the idea that we have crossed some sort of
historical threshold after which all illusions are somehow irrevocably and miraculously
dispelled and it is no longer possible to see the world and human life as unconditionally
meaningful. Furthermore, the ideas of the great modern thinkers are seen as “insights into
reality so deep as to be ahistorical,” somehow fixed and inevitable, unlike the fallible
ideas of the past.130 While the narrative itself may be wrong, its widespread acceptance
has gone largely unremarked and unchallenged, accompanied by a need to debunk all
facets of human experience.
The core assumption of modern thought in all its variations, Robinson writes, “is
that the experience and testimony of the individual mind is to be explained away,
excluded from consideration when any rational account is made of the nature of human
being and of being altogether.”131 The mind does not always, or even a majority of the
time, proceed according to the terms of reason or logic. In a model prefaced on the idea
that everything can be ordered and explained, it is stubbornly anomalous and
unfathomably complex. The insight that it yields is only reliable in the sense that it tends
to elude our own understanding and resist final explanation altogether. Thus, it is only
possible to fully account for the human mind by discrediting it, dismissing much of what
it causes us to think and feel as illusions that do not hold up under rational scrutiny.
Part of what makes Robinson’s rejection of this narrative of modernity
compelling is that it is not primarily intellectual in nature—she does not really think that
the modern understanding of human beings that reduces them to knowable physical laws
130
131

Absence of Mind, 21
Ibid., 22
68

should be replaced by better models. Rather, the problem with this modern understanding
is that it doesn’t reflect the subjective, felt experience of consciousness that each person
intuitively knows on a personal level. If Robinson’s opposition to much of modern
thought seems at times startlingly sweeping, it is because she believes this sort of
reductionist picture is one that has become a foundational assumption for a variety of
disciplines, particularly the social sciences. In her essay “Freedom of Thought” Robinson
describes her experience as an undergraduate:
At a certain point I decided that everything I took from studying and
reading anthropology, psychology, economics, cultural history and so on
did not square at all with my sense of things, and that the tendency of
much of it was to posit or assume a human simplicity within a simple
reality and to marginalize the sense of the sacred, the beautiful, everything
in every way lofty.132
We consider sacred or call beautiful that which resists the bounds of our understanding
but which nonetheless strikes us as profoundly meaningful. The objective viewpoint of
the social scientist, however, does not accommodate this internal sense of wonder or awe.
Rather, the standards of these disciplines dictate that the observer isolate particular
patterns of behavior in terms of what can be studied, quantified, and evaluated. But
Robinson’s broad and provocative characterization—that the social sciences, in their very
approach, do not account for the richness of human experience—is nonetheless
frustrating. Granting that many modern thinkers implicitly assume reductionist models,
isn’t it possible that the nature of our experience has in fact been altered, simply because

132

When I Was A Child I Read Books, 5
69

our collective perception of our experiences has collectively shifted as a result of these
models?133
Implicit in Robinson’s argument, however, is the idea that the possibilities of
human experience in the world have not changed as a result of modernity. It is not that
beauty or meaningfulness has in some sense been removed, but rather that we have
ceased to know how to acknowledge it. We have collectively accepted these simplistic
and totalizing models on faith, despite what we may understand of ourselves apart from
them. But the abundance of the world remains latent in our experience of it; this
abundance cannot be taken away from us. Robinson writes of “that haunting
compatibility of our means of knowing with the universe of things to be known. Yet,
even as our capacity to describe the fabric of reality and the dimensions of it has
undergone an astonishing deepening and expansion, we have turned away from the
ancient intuition that we are a part of it all.” That the human being was a “microcosm, a
small epitome of the universe”—a persistent notion until the beginning of the modern
scientific period—was not a naïve understanding that scientific advancement disproved.
What happened, rather, was that we stopped taking into account those experiences that
could not be verified or evaluated through scientific reasoning.134
Robinson is well-aware that the quintessentially modern thinkers she is most
concerned with—Darwin, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, and B.F. Skinner are the figures

133

In A Secular Age, Charles Taylor makes the similar point that arguments about
the impossibility of belief in God in the modern age have become so widespread and
pervasive that there is a way in which the actual validity of these arguments is no
longer important. “In a certain sense, the original arguments on which this narrative
rests cease to matter,” he writes, “so powerful is the sense created in certain milieu,
that these old views just can’t be options for us” (Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, 590).
134 Robinson, Absence of Mind, xii-xiv
70

frequently cited—are by no means identical or even compatible in their understandings of
human being. What unites them for Robinson, however, is that they all make totalizing
claims about human beings and exclude or subordinate cultural or historical testimonies
that contradict their descriptive models. All of them assume that the Western
understanding of what it means to be human, an understanding greatly fostered by
religious narrative and doctrine as well as the classical and humanist traditions, has been
wrong.135 In doing so, these thinkers and the bodies of thought with which they are
associated “exclude the great fact of human exceptionalism, though no one would deny
that it is a pure expression of the human brain.”136 They assert that the diminishing of our
understanding of human being and its role in the universe is the inevitable result of the
knowledge we have gained about ourselves.
In Absence of Mind, Robinson gives a name to the kind of reductionist thinking
that has flourished in the modern age: parascience. Parascientific literature, she writes,
always proceeds from “a genesis of human nature in primordial life to a set of general
conclusions about what our nature is and must be, together with the ethical, political,
economic and/or philosophic implications to be drawn from these conclusions.”137 It is
the idea that our essential selves are contained in our origins, accompanied by an often
drastically simplistic idea of these origins. One of the biggest implications of this idea is
that human agency is rendered an illusion: our true motivations exist at a great remove
from our own lives, set into motion generations before we ever came into being as

135

Absence of Mind, xiii
Ibid., 133
137 Ibid., 32-33
136

71

individuals. That our minds are not our own is thus, for Robinson, the essential modern
conviction:
The conviction so generally shared among us, that we think in some
ordinary sense of the word, that we reason and learn and choose as
individuals in response to our circumstances and capacities, is simply—the
one, crucial point of agreement between these otherwise incompatible
theories—a persisting illusion serving a force or a process that is
essentially unknown and indifferent to us.138
The rise of parascience has been enabled by the idea that in ridding ourselves of all
notions of the transcendent, we achieve true freedom. But the implication of
parascientific thinking is in fact the opposite. We may think we do something for a
particular reason, but in fact we never know for sure why we have chosen one thing over
another, or why we have responded in a particular way to a given situation. We may
believe we are conscious agents, but we are actually ruled by our primitive and selfinterested selves.
For Robinson, one of the biggest champions of this idea of conscious agency as
an illusion is Sigmund Freud. In Absence of Mind she argues that Freud’s conception of a
universal human persona shaped by a single narrative was a reaction to the racial,
cultural, and national fracturing of early twentieth century Europe, “an implicit challenge
to a conception of the character of the unconscious as a substratum of racial and national
identity.”139 It is a complex and undoubtedly provocative argument, important for my
purposes here insofar as it points to the importance for Robinson of locating the great
modern thinkers within their historically contingent circumstances. In addition to using
Freud as an example of how modern ideas are often severed from the contexts in which

138
139

Absence of Mind, 71
Ibid., 84
72

they arose, however, Freud is also a key thinker for Robinson in that he envisions human
consciousness as mostly severed from a larger external reality. If there was a concrete
historical moment when metaphysics gave way to parascience, she writes, it was “when
European thought turned from epistemology and ontology to politics and parascience—
and when Freud was creating his great narrative about the nature of the mind.”140
In the Freudian model, according to Robinson, the world is primarily a threat to
the well-being of the individual—or rather, the organism. The self only remains tied to a
larger reality as much as is needed for its own survival; in effect it must ration its
awareness so as to be able to endure its own consciousness.141 The external world is not
capable of imparting to us truth or meaning; instead, it besieges the individual with
stimuli from which he or she must be protected and shielded. This sense of self and world
alienation is perhaps best encapsulated in Freud’s criticism of the “oceanic feeling” that
religion fosters, which he describes as “a feeling of an indissoluble bond, of being one
with the external world as a whole.”142 The passage that Robinson cites from Civilization
and its Discontents concerning this feeling is worth reproducing here:
The idea of men’s receiving an intimation of their connection with the
world around them through an immediate feeling which is from the outset
directed to that purpose sounds so strange and fits in so badly with the
fabric of our psychology that one is justified in attempting to discover a
psycho-analytic—that is, a genetic—explanation of such a feeling.143
After expressing incredulity that such a feeling could exist, Freud goes on to attribute the
pervasiveness of this feeling to the arrested development of the ego. Originally, he
explains, the ego is not perceived as being separate from the external world. Over time,
140

Absence of Mind, 99
Ibid., 102
142 Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, 12
143 Ibid.
141

73

however, the ego detaches itself from what is external to it in order to defend itself
against sensations of displeasure. As differentiating between what is internal and what is
external is one of the basic processes of maturity, those states in which “the boundary
lines between the ego and the external world become uncertain or in which they are
actually drawn incorrectly” are instances of pathology.144
The fact that Freud ultimately dismisses a feeling of fundamental connection to
the world as a primitive leftover from childhood reflects a distinctly modern skepticism
about the possibility of consciousness to reflect and participate in a larger reality.
Furthermore, Robinson points out, the psychoanalytic project as a whole implies that
subjective experience—particularly experience that could be thought of as spiritual—is
not to be trusted. She remarks:
Freud’s self is encapsulated, engrossed by an interior drama of which it
cannot be made consciously aware—unless instructed in self-awareness,
by means of psychoanalysis. That is to say, the center of emotional
experience, the source of motive and inhibition, is inaccessible to the self
as experience. The consciousness, whose ignorance of motive and
inhibition is an accommodation to the demands of civilization, is therefore
false, and civilization, the sum total of such accommodation, is false as
well.145
The problem with the narrative of modernity does not turn for Robinson on the question
of human consciousness alone, but consciousness as the builder of civilization, the force
that has created the structures and institutions that we are now so eager to discredit and
dismantle.
It is the modern inability to trust that our experiences are meaningful in
themselves that has fostered a widespread cultural pessimism and led to a decline in the

144
145

Absence of Mind, 13
Ibid., 105-106
74

studying of the humanities. “True” humanism as Robinson understands it has always
been intrinsically dependent upon this trust. She writes in the introduction to The Death
of Adam that “what used to be meant by ‘humanism,’ that old romance of the self, the
idea that the self is to be refined by exposure to things that are wonderful and difficult
and imbued with the human spirit, has ended.”146 Humanism was a sensibility, an
aesthetic appreciation of and pleasure in the human presence, even in its darkest
moments. It follows that the loss of this appreciation—what Robinson calls elsewhere an
“imaginative love for people we do not know or whom we know very slightly”—has
been accompanied by a declining interest in literature, as we have ceased to recognize the
meaningfulness of our own experience.147
If Robinson aims in her nonfiction to lay bare and critique the assumption that we
have entered an age of impoverished or otherwise fundamentally demystified experience,
her fiction constitutes her implicit counterchallenge to this idea, as an exploration of how
human beings fit into the world. Her first novel, Housekeeping, is a portrait of
consciousness that bears no resemblance to the modern understanding of consciousness
as inauthentic or cut off from the world is some fundamental and irrevocable way.
Consciousness as it is depicted in the novel does not separate one from the world, but is
rather the fundamental mediating connection between the internal and external worlds.
The miraculousness of consciousness is that it creates an openness and receptivity to the
world precisely by remaining bound within the self.
Housekeeping is set in the small Far West town of Fingerbone, a town “chastened
by an outsized landscape and extravagant weather, and chastened again by an awareness
146
147

The Death of Adam, 8
When I Was A Child I Read Books, 21
75

that the whole of human history had occurred elsewhere,” and tells the story of Ruth and
her sister Lucille, whose childhoods have been defined by terrible and intriguing loss.148
This sense of loss, and the possibility of resolution that is carried with it, defines the
consciousness of Ruth, the narrator; it shapes her observations, her memories, her entire
way of seeing the world, creating a slippage between memory, imagination, and
perception. Remarks Ruth, “I have never distinguished readily between thinking and
dreaming. I know my life would be much different if I could ever say, This I have learned
from my senses while that I have merely imagined.”149 Yet the ambiguity and final
unknowability of the nature of experience never leads to doubt of one’s own reality, for
reality is not some sort of final and knowable state that lends itself to confirmation.
Indeed, “reality” in the context of the novel translates into something like the interaction
of consciousness with the external world; it could never be abstracted, separated from the
work of the individual mind within its environment.
The instability of consciousness in the novel comes partly from its intrinsic
relation to the enduring yet ever-changing landscape, namely, the glacial lake around
which Fingerbone is built. Rather than being a mere backdrop for the novel, the lake is
almost a character in itself, an active presence that shapes Ruth’s consciousness and
forms the locus of the narrative. Lucille and Ruth’s grandfather died before they were
born in a train wreck on the lake, a spectacular and mysterious event that claimed many
lives and came to define the town. And when they were young, their mother drove off a
cliff into the lake, leaving Lucille and Ruth to be raised by their grandmother and, when
she dies, their aunt Sylvie. The lake is thus permeated with human presence, the cradle
148
149

Housekeeping, 62
Ibid., 215-216
76

and preserver of the past: “Looking out at the lake one could believe that the Flood had
never ended. If one is lost on the water, any hill is Ararat. And below is always the
accumulated past, which vanishes but does not vanish, which perishes and remains.”150
As the site of memory, the lake is deeply familiar to Ruth, a place of solace. But in its
Biblical significance and as a claimer of lives it is also enigmatic and powerful, even
threatening—like the Deluge, it is “hardly a human world”.151
In this way the lake has the power to subsume consciousness, to reconcile
appearance and perception by absorbing them entirely within its darkness and depth.
Ruth contemplates this possibility of resolution when she and Lucille spend the night on
the lake, and she recalls memories of her mother and grandmother:
Such details are merely accidental. Who could know but us? And since
their thoughts were bent upon other ghosts than ours, other darknesses
than we had seen, why must we be left, the survivors picking among
flotsam, among the small, unnoticed, unvalued clutter that was all that
remained when they vanished, that only catastrophe made noticeable?
Darkness is the only solvent…it seemed to me that there need not be relic,
remnant, margin, residue, memento, bequest, memory, thought, track, or
trace, if only the darkness could be made perfect and permanent.152
There is a certain comfort in the thought of such resolution, as it erases the pain of loss.
But it is also a resolution that passes beyond the human realm and enters into an
otherness that cannot be fully understood; it resolves consciousness by extinguishing it.
Though the reciprocal relationship between the human and non-human world is part of
what constitutes consciousness, some final and essential distinction remains.
The need for resolution and restoration is nonetheless a central theme of the
novel, as the accumulated past lying beneath the lake seems to suggest that a reclaiming
150

Housekeeping, 172
Ibid.
152 Ibid., 116
151

77

will one day be possible. Indeed, the possibility of resolution is not only expressed but
arises through metaphor. Ruth contemplates, for example, how the finality of death is
belied by the coming of spring when she thinks about two apple trees in her
grandmother’s orchard that have long ago ceased to blossom: “They have lost their bark
and blanched white, and a wind will snap their bones, but if ever a leaf does appear, it
should be no great wonder.”153 That such a change, an undoing of death, would be “no
great wonder” points to the illusory nature of appearance, as what appears to have
vanished may never have been lost. The possibility of renewal is always latent in the
things of the natural world. The recurring analogy of our thoughts as reflections on water
also indicates this remarkable persistence; just as a reflection may be disturbed in water
but remain afterwards unbroken, so too do our thoughts persist “outside the brisk and
ruinous energies of the world.”154
That it is in the nature of thoughts to endure as memories or reoccur as
imagination is what ultimately opens up the true possibility of renewal or resolution in
the novel. When Ruth finds in her house a pamphlet with the words I will make you
fishers of men, she imagines her aunt Molly, a missionary, sweeping a great net along the
bottom of the lake. This harvesting, which will gather all that has been swallowed up
over thousands of years, seems possible to Ruth from watching birds rise into the clouds
and gnats sail out of the grass:
Ascension seemed at such times a natural law. If one added to it a law of
completion—that everything must finally be made comprehensible—then
some general rescue of the sort I imagined my aunt to have undertaken
would be inevitable. For why do our thoughts turn to some gesture of a
hand, the fall of a sleeve, some corner of a room on a particular
153
154

Housekeeping, 124
Ibid., 163
78

anonymous afternoon, even when we are asleep, and even when we are so
old that our thoughts have abandoned other business? What are all these
fragments for, if not to be knit up finally?155
The critic James Wood pointed to this passage as evidence of Robinson’s “abiding
interest in the question of heavenly restoration.”156 Such a claim must be qualified,
however, as the knitting up that Ruth is speaking of here is the work, or at least the
impetus, of consciousness, specifically, human consciousness. While a final harvesting of
the sort Ruth speaks of may never be accomplished, the mind strives towards such a unity
every time we relate a particular memory to a present moment, or imbue the things of the
world with a significance that transcends their mere appearance, or create a narrative that
renders experience meaningful.157
The fact that Ruth speaks of consciousness in “human” terms, however, does not
contradict Wood’s interpretation, for one of the claims of the novel is that consciousness
is somehow written into the fabric of the world in a way that opens unto the possibility of
divine presence. One of the most remarkable passages of the novel is when Ruth
imagines “a Carthage sown with salt.” Such a home would not be desolate because the
longing intrinsic to such a world would render experience more acute:
For need can blossom into all the compensation it requires. To crave and
to have are as like as a thing and its shadow. For when does a berry break
upon the tongue as sweetly as when one longs to taste it, and when is the
taste refracted into so many hues and savors of ripeness and earth, and
when do our senses know a thing so utterly as when we lack it? And here
again is a foreshadowing—the world will be made whole. For to wish for

155

Housekeeping, 92
James Wood, “The Homecoming”
157 Writes Robinson in the essay “Wondrous Love”: “Narrative always implies cause
and consequence. It creates paradigmatic structures around which experience can
be ordered, and this certainty would account for the craving for it, which might as
well be called a need.” (When I Was A Child I Read Books, 126)
156

79

a hand on one’s hair is all but to feel it. So whatever we may lose, very
craving gives it back to us again.158
Memory shows us what we are looking for, what we wish to return to, what resolution
might look like. It is precisely because memory preserves the sense of loss that it can
carry the promise of healing, for it creates within us the longing that pulls us forward,
towards its own fulfillment. But it ultimately offers only a foreshadowing, a partial
restoration; it preserves and orders experience, but it does not resolve it.
In Housekeeping, the work of consciousness as it is depicted through the character
of Ruth is twofold. First, consciousness or personhood is in some sense written into the
world itself, for the landscape is an active presence, a consciousness unto itself, rather
than inanimate matter onto which the self projects meaning. Similarly, there is a sort of
inherent order within experience that must be brought out, fragments which must be
pieced together and rendered meaningful. Consciousness, finally, fits within the world
because it can “read” the world, receive its meaning and translate it into language. That
the world, in turn, lends itself to be read in this way shows that there is an inherent
possibility of resolution written into the fabric of existence.
The ability of consciousness to make meaning out of what is given, to draw
comparisons and distinctions and otherwise transform experience into narrative, is part of
what Robinson means when she refers to the “singular dignity” of human beings. But this
singularity also consists in the fact that human beings are the only beings with a “capacity
for morally significant behavior, a singular capacity to do harm.”159 In its view of human
beings, modern humanism proceeds from the belief that religion has instituted a false and

158
159

Housekeeping, 152-153
“Cosmology,” 52
80

hubristic divide between ourselves and the rest of nature, and that humanism, in contrast,
recognizes that we are a part of nature. But Robinson points to the fact that this divide
does not assume the superiority of human beings, but rather recognizes our unique
capacity for great destruction. Similarly, the Darwinist worldview fails to see that what
makes human beings different from animals is not only that we can act altruistically, but
also that we often choose to disobey or disregard our own moral precepts. Writes
Robinson: “The presence of human consciousness is a radical, qualitative change in the
natural order…The striking thing about our species is that we create around us a vast
need for a moral sense, to which our best instincts are clearly by no means equal.”160
Religion is one way in which this moral sense has been acknowledged and expressed.
That religion has in the past violated its own moral principles and yet continues to affirm
them testifies to their power, not to their hollowness.
This singular capacity for harm is expressed particularly strongly for Robinson in
the thought of John Calvin, who is one of the central figures in her nonfiction and one of
the primary influences on her own religious identity. In the essay “Puritans and Prigs,”
Robinson defends the Calvinist doctrine of total depravity, which teaches that “we are all
absolutely, that is equally, unworthy of, and dependent upon, the free intervention of
grace.”161 The benefit of such an understanding, she writes, is that it values humility in all
cases: “For in fact life makes goodness much easier for some people than for others, and
it is rich with varieties of cautious or bland or malign goodness, in the Bible referred to
generally as self-righteousness, and inveighed against as grievous offenses in their own

160
161

“Cosmology,” 53
The Death of Adam 155
81

right.”162 While the Christian tradition has always “assumed that rather few would be
saved,” the Calvinist model “allows for the mysteriousness of life” because it teaches us
that true goodness—the type of goodness that will be saved—is not necessarily
discernible to us. Robinson opposes this idea to a vision of “perfectionism”, by which she
means the belief that society can not only recognize the true “good” but can and should
produce it. Such an idea is dangerous, she believes, because it sanctions and encourages
the weeding out of “bad” people and ideas. Once we lose the understanding that “Gross
error survives every attempt at perfection, and flourishes”, we begin to think that we can
act as gods, valuing and devaluing different parts of existence as we see fit.163
If what constitutes goodness is ultimately a mystery to us, what should be
celebrated, acknowledged, even exalted is not goodness, but what Robinson calls in her
novel Gilead “the exquisite and primary fact of existence.”164 Set in the small town of
Gilead, Iowa, the novel is written from the perspective of the Reverend John Ames, an
elderly Congregationalist pastor who is nearing death and reflecting on his life. In one
sense the character of Ames serves as a means for Robinson for thinking about and
responding to critiques of Christianity and of religion in general. But Ames is also, more
broadly, a suggestion for how religious faith—faith in the way that Robinson conceives
of it, in the sense of recognizing the ultimate mystery of existence—heightens our
perception and helps us to grasp the meaningfulness of the mortal condition.
In Housekeeping there is a reciprocal relationship between the individual
consciousness and the world, as consciousness does not strictly create meaning but rather

162

Ibid., 156
Ibid.
164 Ibid., 190
163

82

recognizes and articulates what is already in some way given. Similarly, in Gilead there
is a framing power in religious practice, as it helps the individual to recognize what is
already latent not just in our experience but in the world itself. “It is a remarkable thing to
consider,” Ames remarks several times in his private reveries, and Gilead, like
Housekeeping, is replete with descriptions of moments of quiet remarkability. One such
description is Ames’ discussion of baptism:
There is a reality in blessing, which I take baptism to be, primarily. It
doesn’t enhance sacredness but it acknowledges it, and there is a power in
that. I have felt it pass through me, so to speak. The sensation is of really
knowing a creature, I mean really feeling its mysterious life and your
mysterious life at the same time.165
Baptism is a brief moment of awakening that affords one a glimpse at an underlying
reality often missed in daily life. This is, more broadly, one of the responsibilities and
values of religion, for Robinson: to alert us to the existence of this underlying reality and
help us to see the sacredness of the ordinary.
Ames’ narration is imbued throughout the novel with a pure and wholehearted
astonishment that recalls the ancient Greek idea of thaumazein, or wonder at what is.
Reflecting on his meetings with members of his congregation, Ames describes this
wonder at “the life that is the real subject of it all”:
By “life” I mean something like “energy” (as the scientists use the word)
or “vitality,” and also something very different. When people come to
speak to me, whatever they say, I am struck by a kind of incandescence in
them, the “I” whose predicate can be “love” or “fear” or “want,” and
whose object can be “someone” or “nothing” and it won’t really matter,
because the loveliness is just in that presence, shaped around “I” like a
flame on a wick, emanating itself in grief and guilt and joy and whatever
else.166

165
166

Gilead, 23
Ibid., 44-45
83

When Ames qualifies his use of the word “life”, he shows that what he means to privilege
is really human life over a strictly scientific and biological sense of the word. Such life is
defined by that almost mythic “I” that is itself meaningful without qualification, a human
presence that is singular in its very ability to utter “I,” regardless of what follows. That
this presence “emanates itself” is a particularly beautiful turn of phrase in that it
emphasizes the agency of the human presence, and the metaphor itself—the flame on a
wick—implies a subtle but important distinction between some sort of internal core of
selfhood and an external presence that shines forth into the world.
The notion that there is some sort of internal core in each person, a core
mysterious even to the individual himself, is embodied in the character of Jack Boughton,
the son of Ames’ friend. When he was young, Jack fathered a child but refused to take
responsibility for it and left town. His returning home decades later causes Reverend
Ames much difficulty, as Ames feels unable to forgive him for what he did. Ames
describes how, even before the incident with the girl, Jack seemed unable to be good and
how he had a particular and mysterious sadness about him. “His transgressions were sly
and lonely,” Ames says, “and this became truer as he grew up…There was no sense in
what he did, unless his purpose was to cause a maximum of embarrassment and a
minimum of retribution.”167 Though Jack has caused others much pain in his life, there is
the sense that this was always somehow despite himself. He is the prodigal son of his
family, beloved by them but finally unable to accept this love, instead inexplicably
compelled to reject it or disappoint it.

167

Gilead, 182
84

As he struggles with his feelings about Jack, Ames finds peace in the idea that
there is a strange and profound beauty in human fallibility, and that to acknowledge this
beauty is to emulate God’s seeing of the world. He recalls an idea of Calvin’s, that each
person is an actor on a stage and God is the audience. “That metaphor has always
interested me,” Ames says, “because it makes us artists of our behavior, and the reaction
of God to us might be thought of as aesthetic rather than morally judgmental in the
ordinary sense.”168 That God somehow takes pleasure in human fallibility frees us from
the need to account for the mystery of our existence, to render it explainable. Towards the
end of the book, when Ames is sitting with Jack on his porch, he reflects, “I wished I
could sit at the feet of that eternal soul and learn. He did then seem to me the angel of
himself, brooding over the mysteries his mortal life describes, the deep things of man.
And of course that is exactly what he is.”169 Jack’s transgressions, though they are terrible
in the eyes of Ames, are in the same moment worthy of a kind of awe. In showing the
way in which our actions often elude final explanation and rationale, they testify to the
ultimate mysteriousness of mortal existence.
Intrinsic to Robinson’s conception of the singularity and unknowability of each
person is a kind of individualism—not the individualism that Rowan Williams sees in the
thought of Isaiah Berlin, which is a product of the inevitable conflicts of interest that arise
in a democratic society—but a more existential individualism, stemming from the deep
interiority within each person. Following the passage about Jack quoted above, Ames
observes:

168
169

Gilead, 124
Ibid., 197
85

In every important way we are such secrets from each other, and I do
believe that there is a separate language in each of us, also a separate
aesthetics and a separate jurisprudence. Every single one of us is a little
civilization built on the ruins of any number of preceding civilizations, but
with our own variant notions of what is beautiful and what is acceptable—
which, I hasten to add, we generally do not satisfy and by which we
struggle to live. We take fortuitous resemblances among us to be actual
likeness, because those around us have also fallen heir to the same
customs, trade in the same coin, acknowledge, more or less, the same
notions of decency and sanity. But all that really just allows us to coexist
with the inviolable, untraversable, and utterly vast spaces between us.170
There is an integrity and majesty to this idea of each person as a civilization unto
themselves, but it is an integrity that, as in Housekeeping, does not resolve into being
completely comfortable in the world. There is always an irremediable otherness within
worldly encounters and experiences that can only be acknowledged and honored, as
Ames comes to do with Jack. Indeed, there is a sense in which solitude is for Robinson
the most fundamental human experience, for it is in solitude that one answers to oneself
and apprehends one’s individual, subjective existence in its relation to the whole of
existence, or to Being, or to the divine.
Though religion is an inherently personal frame of perception, there is also a way
in which a religious seeing of the world brings us into an ethical relationship with others.
The singular unknowability within each being is for Robinson an analogy for, or even an
example of, the ultimate unknowability of Being. In this way, the recognition of that
elusive otherness within other people, of that which cannot be fully explained or
accounted for but finally only acknowledged, opens up the possibility for the
acknowledgement of Being, and in turn, the recognition of Being as ultimately
unknowable awakens to our perception the divinity within another person. A religious

170

Gilead, 197
86

frame of understanding thus does not serve to resolve our existence in the world, but
rather instruct it.
Robinson writes in Absence of Mind that “an attempt to re-integrate us into our
cosmic setting might look like theology, or mysticism.”171 In one sense, this is because
theology has historically provided a vocabulary for talking about existence; it can
accommodate the great complexity, difficulties, and paradoxes of the concept. But it is
also because theology, as Robinson remarks elsewhere, “always begins by assuming
major terms.”172 The attempt at re-integration of human beings into the cosmos would
begin with the assumption that the reality in which we find ourselves does not lend itself
to final explanation. It would assume that we have an indelible place within this reality as
beings that can grasp its inexhaustible meaningfulness, if not its ultimate meaning, and it
would, finally, constitute an expression of gratitude for the mysterious and unqualified
gift of existence.

171
172

Absence of Mind, xv
The Death of Adam, 117
87

Works Cited
Al-Khalil, Jim. "Believing in a God Is Fine by Me." New Statesman. March 27, 2013.
Accessed April 19, 2013. http://www.newstatesman.com/lifestyle/religion/
2013/03/god-dead-long-live-our-souls#KarenArmstrong.
American Humanist Association. “Humanist Manifesto I.” Last modified 1973.
Accessed April 21, 2013. http://www.americanhumanist.org/Humanism/
Humanist_Manifesto_I.
American Humanist Association. “Humanists of the Year.” Last modified 2013.
Accessed April 28, 2013. http://www.americanhumanist.org/AHA/
Humanists_of_the_Year.
Appleman, Philip. “Darwin: On Changing the Mind (2000). Darwin: Texts, Commentary.
1970. Edited by Philip Appleman. Norton Critical Editions. 3rd ed. New York:
W.W. Norton & Company, 2001.
Arendt, Hannah. Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political Thought. New
York: The Viking Press, 1961.
Arendt, Hannah. “The Conquest of Space and the Stature of Man.” The New Atlantis. Fall
2007. http://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/the-conquest-of-space-and-thestature-of-man.
Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958.
Arendt, Hannah. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Orlando: Harcourt, Inc., 1976.
Arendt, Hannah. Responsibility and Judgment. Edited by Jerome Kohn. New York:
Schocken, 2003.
Birmingham, Peg. Hannah Arendt and Human Rights: The Predicament of Common
Responsibility. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2006.
Browne, Janet. Darwin’s Origin of Species: A Biography. New York: Atlantic Monthly
Press, 2006.
Darwin, Charles. Darwin: Texts, Commentary. Edited by Philip Appleman. Norton
Critical Editions. 3rd ed. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2001.
Darwin, Charles. “Darwin, C.R. to Graham, William.” Darwin Correspondance Database.
Last modified 2013. Accessed April 24, 2013. http://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/

88

entry-13230.
Dawkins, Richard. “In Defense of Selfish Genes.” Philosophy 56, no. 218 (1981): 556573. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3750888.
Dawkins, Richard. The Blind Watchmaker. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1996.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene. New York: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and its Discontents. Translated and edited by James
Strachey. NewYork: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1961.
Gould, Stephen Jay. The Richness of Life: The Essential Stephen Jay Gould. Edited by
Paul McGarr and Steven Rose. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2006.
Heidegger, Martin. Pathmarks. Edited by William McNeil. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2009.
Levine, George. Darwin Loves You: Natural Selection and the Re-Enchantment of the
World. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006.
Malthus, Thomas. “Essay on the Principle of Population.” An Essay on the Principle of
Population: Text, Sources, and Background, Criticism. Edited by Philip
Appleman. Norton Critical Editions. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1976.
McCarthy, Michael H. The Political Humanism of Hannah Arendt. Lanham: Lexington
Books, 2012.
Mithen, Steven. “How Fit Is E.O. Wilson’s Evolution?” New York Review of Books. June
21, 2012.
Richards, Robert J. “Darwin’s Theory of Natural Selection and Its Moral Purpose.” The
Cambridge Companion to the “Origin of Species.” Edited by Michael Ruse and
Robert J. Richards. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Robinson, Marilynne. Absence of Mind: The Dispelling of Inwardness from the Modern
Myth of the Self. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010.
Robinson, Marilynne. The Death of Adam: Essays on Modern Thought. New York:
Picador, 2005.
Robinson, Marilynne. Gilead. New York: Picador, 2004.
Robinson, Marilynne. Housekeeping. New York: Picador, 1980.
Robinson, Marilynne. Interview by Bob Abernathy. Religion and Ethics Newsweekly.
Podcast audio. March 18, 2005. Accessed April 21, 2013.

89

http://www.pbs.org/wnet/religionandethics/episodes/march-18-2005/interviewmarilynne-robinson/4226.
Ruse, Michael. Darwinism and Its Discontents. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2006.
Ruse, Michael. Mystery of Mysteries: Is Evolution a Social Construction? Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1999.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Existential Is a Humanism. Translated by Carol Macomber. Edited by
John Kulka. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007.
Sloterdijk, Peter. “Rules for the Human Zoo: A Response to the Letter on Humanism.”
Translated by Mary Varney Rorty. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space 27, no. 1 (2009): 12-28. http://www.envplan.com/abstract.cgi?id=dst3
Taylor, Charles. A Secular Age. Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press, 2007.
Weber, Max. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Translated and edited by H.H.
Gerth and C. Wright Mills. New York: Oxford University Press, 1946.
Weigel, George. “John Paul II and the Crisis of Humanism.” First Things. December
1999. http://www.firstthings.com/article/2007/01/john-paul-ii-and-the-crisis-ofhumanism-19.
Williams, Rowan. Faith in the Public Square. London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2012.
Williams, Rowan. Introduction to Theology and the Political: The New Debate. Edited by
Creston Davis, John Milbank, and Slavoj Žižek. Durham: Duke University Press,
2005.
Wilson, E.O. On Human Nature: Revised Edition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
2004.
Wood, James. “The Homecoming.” The New Yorker. September 8, 2008.
http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2008/09/08/080908crbo_books_wo
od.
Wright, Robert. “The Accidental Creationist: Why Stephen Jay Gould is Bad for
Evolution.” Nonzero.org. Accessed April 22, 2013. http://www.nonzero
.org/newyorker.htm.

90

91

