Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2014

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2014

Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream: Voice,
Reality, and Imagination in Works by Joan Didion
Lucy K. Meilus
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Meilus, Lucy K., "Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream: Voice, Reality, and Imagination in Works by Joan Didion" (2014). Senior
Projects Spring 2014. Paper 138.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2014/138

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2014 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

	  

Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream:
Voice, Reality, and Imagination in Works by Joan Didion

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Lucy Meilus

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2014

	  

Acknowledgements
To Elizabeth Frank, for her extraordinary support and brilliant wisdom—I owe her everything;
to my family, for their incredible love and encouragement;
to Marisa Libbon, for her helpful comments and critiques at my midway board;
to all of my Bard professors, for their invaluable lessons;
and, of course, to Ms. Didion herself.

	  

Table of Contents

Acknowledgements
Introduction............................................................................................................1
Chapter I: Time in the Golden Land....................................................................6
Slouching Towards Bethlehem
The White Album
Chapter II: Romance of the Political Tropics.....................................................24
Salvador
Miami
Chapter III: Political Fictions...............................................................................54
A Book of Common Prayer
Democracy
Conclusion...............................................................................................................82
Works Cited..............................................................................................................88

	  
“To covet truth is a very distinguished passion…Those who are genuinely concerned with
discovering what happens to be true are…the men of science, the naturalists, the historians…the
truths they find are never complete, and are not always important; but they are integral parts of
the truth, facts and circumstances that help fill in the picture, and that no later interpretation can
invalidate or afford to contradict” - George Santayana, “The Genteel Tradition in American
Philosophy.”1

“Had my credentials been in order I would never have become a writer. Had I been blessed with
even limited access to my own mind there would have been no reason to write. I write entirely to
find out what I’m thinking, what I’m looking at, what I see and what it means. What I want and
what I fear.” –Joan Didion, “Why I Write.”2

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

George Santayana, “The Genteel Tradition in American Philosophy,” The American Intellectual Tradition, ed.
David A. Hollinger and Charles Capper (New York: Oxford UP, 2011) 113.
2

Joan Didion, "Why I Write," New York Times Book Review (Dec. 1976): 2. 	  

	  

	  

1	  

Introduction

Joan Didion has played a chief role in postmodern and contemporary American literature
for nearly five decades. Didion was part of the New Journalism movement of the 1960s and
1970s, along with Tom Wolfe, Truman Capote, Hunter S. Thompson, and Normal Mailer.3 The
movement was concerned with editorial writing that, while grounded in fact, resembled a novel
in its use of literary devices and detailed depiction of scene and character.4 In an article for
Representations, Michael E. Staub argues that this new approach to journalism was desperately
needed during the sixties and seventies, as America’s perception of itself was based more in
imagination than any sense of reality. Staub blames the media for distorting the American
perception, citing the coverage of the Vietnam War as a glaring example.5 Historians have also
argued that the American media did not present a complete picture of the Vietnam War. Popular
criticisms have been that the reporting was biased, focused only on combat (rather than the
historical, cultural and social context in which the war was going on), and often laden with
inaccurate information about events.6
There was also a growing belief that traditional journalistic conventions were too
constricting for the times. Journalist Nicolaus Mills notes, the “who, what, where, when, why
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

Ronald Weber, “New Journalism and Old Documentary” Rev. of The New Journalism by Tom Wolfe, The Review
of Politics, Vol. 36, No. 2 (Apr., 1974): 308.
4
Weber, 306.
5
Michael E. Staub, “Black Panthers, New Journalism, and the Rewriting of the Sixties,” Representations, No. 57
(Winter, 1997): 55
6
Spencer Tucker, ed. Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History (Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1998) 1099.

	  

	  

2	  

style of reporting could not begin to capture the anger of a black power movement or the
euphoria of a Woodstock...For an audience either deeply concerned or directly involved in the
changes going on in America, it was necessary to report events from the inside out…”7 New
Journalism’s incorporation of novelistic devices into reportage sought to produce a more
complex, and thus more real, depiction of society. As Nat Hentoff argued in 1968, this new
approach also allowed journalists to seriously express their passion for their subjects. Hentoff
said it was only through a dramatic “novelistic” style that journalists could demonstrate their
own active involvement in what they were reporting on, and thus “help break the glass between
the reader and the world he lives in.”8
Joan Didion fully embraced this approach in her reports on American social and political
phenomena, employing literary devices such as allusion, irony, metonymy, synecdoche,
juxtaposition, and drama, alongside aggressive interrogation and scrupulous attention to detail.
In 1968, Didion published Slouching Towards Bethlehem and in 1979, The White Album. In
these two essay collections, she dissects and attempts to poke holes in the cultural fantasies of
her contemporary America. In 1983’s Salvador and 1987’s Miami, Didion ventures into political
criticism, examining violence, conspiracy, and government corruption.
Didion applied this same amalgamation of literary and journalistic technique to her
novels, scrutinizing culture and politics through the guise of nonfiction. In 1977 and 1984,
Didion published A Book of Common Prayer and Democracy, respectively. In these two novels,
Didion constructs fictional worlds that mirror our own, in which she even more boldly
investigates our country’s cultural and political engagements and the manner in which they are
presented to us.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7

Nicolaus Mills, introduction to The New Journalism: A Historical Anthology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978)
160, 187.
8
Nat Hentoff, “Behold the New Journalism—It’s Coming After You!” Evergreen Review 12 (July 1968): 50.

	  

	  

3	  

What makes Didion’s writing so striking, both in her fiction and nonfiction, is her voice.
Her voice is what keeps her constantly present in her writing, and because of its urgent tone and
attention to language, her passion for her subject is always apparent. What Didion is most
passionate about, throughout her work, is uncovering reality and ascertaining fact. Didion herself
is a close reader of our world; she is highly attuned to detail and subtext. Both fascinated and
terrified by fantasy or obscured reality, she is ardent about dispelling what she sees as “golden
dreams,” or the superficial and ultimately naïve or corrupt illusions to which we have a tendency
to fall prey.
Didion is investigative and interrogative, always watching and listening, and always
skeptical of what she sees and what she hears. As a result, she feels a compulsion to present her
reader with the most empirical image. Whether she is writing about Bay Area hippies in
Slouching Towards Bethlehem or body dumps in Salvador, Didion shares every last detail she
has, and details are often all she has. She is especially attentive to language, always questioning
words and phrases that are all too familiar and rehearsed, and which serve as the stock
vocabulary for American democracy.
At the same time, perhaps one of the most problematic aspects of Didion’s narrative
voice is her desire to stay removed from her subject. She often presents information and then
leaves it without any further comment, explanation or reaction. She relies heavily on implication,
in the form of allusion, metonymy and synecdoche. This is partially a stylistic decision, as
Didion distrusts narrative convention and any type of storytelling cliché. It is also an expression
of her unwavering confidence in her reader’s understanding of what she is trying to say, as well
as a desire to form a sort of conspiratorial intimacy with her reader. Nonetheless, this reliance on
implication problematizes Didion’s quest for the truth.

	  

	  

4	  

It is worth noting that much of Didion’s voice seems to follow in the tradition of the
Imagists poets of the early 20th century. In the preface to Amy Lowell’s 1915 anthology, Some
Imagist Poets (which includes works by Lowell as well as Richard Arlington, D.H. Lawrence,
F.S. Flint et al.), Lowell lays out the “principals” of Imagism.
1. To use the language of common speech, but to employ always the exact word, not the
nearly-exact, nor the merely decorative word.
2. To create new rhythms—as the expression of new moods—and not to copy old
rhythms, which merely echo old moods. [….] We believe that the individuality of a poet
may often be better expressed in free-verse than in conventional forms. In poetry a new
cadence means a new idea.
3. To allow absolute freedom in the choice of subject. It is not good art to write badly of
aeroplanes and automobiles, nor is it necessarily bad art to write well about the past […].
4. To present an image (hence the name: "Imagist"). We are not a school of painters, but
we believe that poetry should render particulars exactly […].
5. To produce poetry that is hard and clear, never blurred nor indefinite.
6. Finally, most of us believe that concentration is of the very essence of poetry.9
While it is possible, and eventually necessary, to take an entirely “narratological” or otherwise
theoretical approach to Joan Didion, this project is concerned more with the methods and
meaning behind her voice, examined through a close analysis of her fiction and nonfiction on
politics and culture. Because Didion does not approach her work with any preconceived theory,
her voice demands us to take on a similar approach. She is obsessed with how our world is
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9

Preface, Some Imagist Poets: An Anthology, ed. Amy Lowell, (Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1915) vi-viii.
N.b.: I will not be comparing Didion to the Imagist poets in this project, but it is worth keeping these “principals” in
mind while reading Didion. Though she has not spoken on the subject, it is likely that the Imagist poets had some
influence on her.

	  

	  

5	  

presented to us, and how we perceive it; for us to understand Didion’s compulsions and how they
are manifested, attention must be paid to the habits of her voice. Focusing on the six works
previously mentioned, this project will consider what type of detail Didion is drawn to, and how
she perceives and then constructs that detail on the page. It will also look at what her
involvement in the setting means for her reader and for the work itself, and what the implications
of her desire to dissociate are. One must also consider, what does Didion’s rhetoric of fact
suggest for fiction and nonfiction as genres, and for her reader and the world at large?
In Didion’s essay “Why I Write,” published by the New York Times Book Review in
1976, she says,
All I know about grammar is its infinite power. To shift the structure of a sentence alters
the meaning of that sentence, as definitely and inflexibly as the position of a camera
alters the meaning of the object photographed. Many people know about camera angles
now, but not so many know about sentences. The arrangement of the words matters, and
the arrangement you want can be found in the picture in your mind. The picture dictates
the arrangement. The picture dictates whether this will be a sentence with or without
clauses, a sentence that ends hard or a dying-fall sentence, long or short, active or
passive. The picture tells you how to arrange the words and the arrangement of the words
tells you, or tells me, what’s going on in the picture. Nota bene:
It tells you.
You don’t tell it.10

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10

Joan Didion, "Why I Write," New York Times Book Review (Dec. 1976): 7.

	  

	  

6	  

CHAPTER I: Time in the Golden Land

Slouching Towards Bethlehem

Joan Didion published Slouching Towards Bethlehem, a collection of predominantly
California-culture based essays, in 1968.11 Didion borrows the title from the last line of the W.B.
Yeats poem, “The Second Coming,” which reads, “…what rough beast, its hour come round at
last/Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?”12 The collection is broken up into three sections:
“Lifestyles In the Golden Land,” “Personals,” and “Seven Places of the Mind.” The majority of
the essays were originally published in The Saturday Evening Post, which also published work
by writers like Ray Bradbury, William Faulkner, and F. Scott Fitzgerald. Other essays from
Slouching were seen first in Vogue, Holiday and The American Scholar. The essays in Slouching
Towards Bethlehem take place over the course of the 1960s, and many deal with the disjointed
idea of the promises of California. In these essays, Didion pokes holes in the cultural fantasies of
the time, and shapes California for her reader through dreams, stories, and memory.
Constructing a sense of place is the most crucial component to any story Didion wants to
tell in Slouching, and in the majority of her other works. In The White Album, the follow-up
essay collection to Slouching, Didion writes, “A place belongs forever to whoever claims it the
hardest, remembers it most obsessively, wrenches it from itself, shapes it, renders it, loves it so
radically that he makes it in his image” (WA 146). Didion obsessively remembers, shapes,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11

All citations from Slouching Towards Bethlehem are to: Joan Didion, Slouching Towards Bethlehem, (New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1968).
12

William Butler Yeats, “The Second Coming,” Poetry Foundation, Poetry Foundation n.d. Web 21 Jan 2014.

	  

	  

7	  

renders, and radically loves every place she writes about, but the place she “claims the hardest”
is California. California belongs to Joan Didion. California is Didion’s home, but as we see in
Slouching, her relationship with the state goes far beyond the standard relationship between
resident and residence. The place calls to her to note and to remember and to engrave in her mind
what she sees, and then to construct it for her reader.
In the essay titled “Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream,” Didion claims California
through her meticulous inventory of the landscape and examination of the power of dreams and
promises. Lucille Miller and her crime, documented in this essay, represent the idea of the “New
California” and the manipulative and ultimately tragic promises that surround it. In October
1964, Lucille Miller took her husband to the market to buy milk. While driving, Lucille claims,
the car swerved and caught fire. Though Lucille made it out of the car, her husband, who had
been sleeping, burned to death while two hours passed before she was able to get help.13 At trial,
the district attorney stated that Lucille Miller had made it look as though the car had rolled over
an embankment and then caught fire.14
Didion begins the essay with, “This is a story about love and death in the golden land,
and begins with the country” (STB 3). Didion is mythologizing California from the start with this
sentence. The name “golden land,” with its connotation of a glimmering paradise, is used
ironically as Didion makes the point that the place is anything but that. She also mythologizes
love and death, setting a scene that seems straight out of film noir. This story “begins with the
country,” because the place is of the utmost importance. She continues,
The future always looks good in the golden land, because no one remembers the past.
Here is where the hot wind blows and the old ways do not seem relevant, where the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
14

Jessie Kissinger, "The California Room," The Paris Review (2013): 1-2.
Verlyn Klinkenborg, "Rereading the Landscape of an Essay by Joan Didion," The New York Times, Jan. 2005: 1.

	  

	  

8	  

divorce rate is double the national average and where one person in every thirty-eight
lives in a trailer. Here is the last stop for all those who come from somewhere else, for all
those who drifted away from…the past and the old ways. Here is where they are trying to
find a new life style, trying to find it in the only places they know to look: the movies and
the newspapers. The case of Lucille Marie Maxwell Miller is a tabloid monument to that
new life style (STB 4).
The “golden land” deceptively glimmers with the promise of an illustrious new life. It is a place
where the past is no longer “relevant,” and purposely forgotten. Didion calls it a “last stop,”
alluding to an idea that people who have been running from their pasts have finally settled here
where they can forget it all. Didion’s assertion that “the future always looks good” here because
of this avoidance and forced obliteration of the past suggests the superficiality of the place; the
“future looks good,” but is it? Those who come to the “golden land” seeking new “life styles”
(note that Didion refers to them not as “lives” but “styles”) find these “life styles” not in
themselves, as they have left their pasts behind, but in stories that have already been written—in
“movies and the newspapers.” The new California, as Didion sees it, is a culture full of fallacies,
where real lives have been forgotten in favor of falsely glamorized “life styles.” She calls Lucille
Miller a “tabloid monument to that new life style,” condemning this culture that is obsessed with
sensational stories, and condemning Lucille, who became the celebrity face of this new style of
living.
After introducing Lucille in this context, Didion does not immediately follow with any
more information about her or about her case; instead, she zeros in on the place. “Imagine
Banyan Street first, because Banyan is where it happened,” Didion instructs her reader (STB 5).
There is a sense of urgency to her voice as she tells her reader to first imagine this place, as

	  

	  

9	  

though the story could not be told otherwise. After Didion has set the reader on Banyan, “where
it happened,” she takes a step back and describes how one gets there:
The way to Banyan is to drive west from San Bernardino out Foothill Boulevard, Route
66: past the Santa Fe switching yards, the Forty Winks Montel…Past Fontana Drag City
and the Fontana Church of Nazarene and the Pit Stop a Go-Go; past Kaiser Steel, through
Cucamonga, out to the Kapu Kai Restaurant-Bar and Coffee Shop, at the corner of Route
66 and Carnelian Avenue. Up Carnelian Avenue from the Kapu Kai, which means
“Forbidden Seas,” the subdivision flags whip in the harsh wind. ‘HALF-ACRE
RANCHES! SNACK BARS! TRAVERTINE ENTRIES! $95 Down.’ It is the trail of an
intention gone haywire, the flotsam of the New California…and then the hill gets steeper
and the road climbs and even the bungalows are few, and here—desolate, roughly
surfaced, lined with eucalyptus and lemon groves—is Banyan street (STB 5).
As she leads her reader to Banyan, Didion’s narrative structure initially resembles directions one
would give a visitor, but ends up more as something of an obsessive-compulsive inventory. The
name of every street and restaurant one passes is mentioned as though just one or two would not
suffice in capturing this place. The focus on naming, the repetition of “Kapu Kai” several times,
and the inclusion that Kapu Kai means “Forbidden Seas,” all work to reify this place for the
reader as a tangible landscape. Didion presents all of this detail, shaping it ever so subtly to force
the reader to look at it from this perceptive, so it can suggest a larger idea. This inventory allows
her to avoid interpretation in favor of implicit meanings; she constructs it so the route
exemplifies the confused landscape of the New California, of a place that tries so hard to move
toward bigger houses and lush foliage, but can’t quite escape its tawdrier, if not more authentic,
past. Didion lends just a brief opinion on the place, remarking that this route is the manifestation

	  

	  

10	  

of “…an intention gone haywire, the flotsam of the New California.” This route, which Lucille
took the night her husband died, speaks to the failure of chasing the dream out in the New
California, that embodies not only this area, but the fate of Lucille Miller herself.
Didion’s use of naming to identify the place and person, and having Lucille and her
externals feed off each other, are modes of this New Journalism that make the piece read more
like fiction than nonfiction. These style choices are fairly nontraditional in writing about a true
crime, and though they allow Didion to construct a fuller, more complex image, there remains a
question about what it means for nonfiction. For a story that is entirely real, there is potential for
this style choice to seem forced, if not factitious.
What lends this essay the most power is Didion’s use of Lucille Miller and her story to
explore the promises of the “golden land,” and how they can consume and then destroy a person.
She says, “What was most startling about the case that the state of California was preparing
against Lucille Miller was something that had nothing to do with law at all, something that never
appeared in the eight-column afternoon headlines but was always there between them: the
revelation that the dream was teaching the dreamers how to live” (STB 17). This is really not a
story about Lucille Miller’s case at all. Didion does not bother with what “[appears] in the
headlines” or anything “to do with the law.” Instead, she is concerned with “what was always
there between” the headlines: the subtext that seems to go unnoticed by traditional reporting that
only focuses on the superficial layer. Lucille Miller is a dreamer; Didion notes that she was born
to a strict Seventh-day Adventist family in Winnipeg, and was anxious to explore the world and
ended up in the “golden land” with a shaky marriage, a high-priced mortgage, and an alleged
affair with a lawyer. Didion is not interested in Miller’s guilt or innocence; she is interested in
the role of fantasies. Here is a woman who eradicated her past for a new life style, and in the

	  

	  

11	  

process let the dream dictate the way she lived. In “Joan Didion’s Dreampolitics of the Self,”
Evan Carton writes, “So completely does the dream assume agency in Didion’s representation of
Lucille Miller’s speech, desires, and actions that the question of her personal guilt or innocence
in the matter of her husband’s death is deliberately ignored and implied to be beside the point.”15
Lucille Miller received life in prison (though she was later released on parole) for first
degree-murder. Describing the California Institute for Women at Frontera, where Lucille was
sentenced, Didion says, “A lot of California murderesses live here, a lot of girls who somehow
misunderstood the promise” (STB 25). Didion’s contention that these girls “misunderstood the
promise” insinuates that there is a “right” way to understand or to use it—what way this is, she
does not say, and it is possible she does not know. What is important is that they have all been
deluded by the California dream, and now they are here.
Didion closes her essay with a reflection on the way time works in the golden land. She
says, “…Time past is not believed to have any bearing upon time present or future, out in the
golden land where every day the world is born anew” (STB 28). The irrelevance of the past in the
“golden land” is a notion that Didion’s voice tells us is the major fallacy within this culture. Her
musings on time here seem to recall lines from T.S. Eliot’s “Burnt Norton.” Eliot writes, “Time
present and time past/Are both perhaps present in time future/And time future contained in time
past/If all time is eternally present/All time is unredeemable.”16 Didion knows, like Eliot, that
“time past” does indeed play a part in “time present” and “future,” but the dreamers do not. The
dream teaches the dreamers how to live, and the past has no part in this world. It is only about
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15

Evan Carton, “Joan Didion’s Dreampolitics of the Self.” The Critical Response to Joan Didion, ed. Sharon Felton
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994) 33.
16
T.S. Eliot, "TS Eliot - Burnt Norton." Art of Europe. N.p., n.d. Web. 5 Mar. 2014.

	  

	  

12	  

the promises—promises of a glamorous, enviable and entirely new life, promises that end up
consuming and destroying people like Lucille Miller.
In “Notes From A Native Daughter,” Didion delves deeper into the notion of a forgotten
past that embodies California. She writes, “It is hard to find California now, unsettling to wonder
how much of it was merely imagined or improvised; melancholy to realize how much of
anyone’s memory is no true memory at all but only the traces of someone else’s memory, stories
handed down on the family network” (STB 177). Place consumes Didion, and the fact that
California as it is now seems grounded more in imagination and “traces of someone else’s
memory” than in any real, concrete past, unnerves her. She goes on to relay an “indelibly vivid
‘memory’” she has of the effect of Prohibition on Sacramento hop growers. A sister of a grower
Didion’s family knew went to San Francisco and brought home a mink coat, which she was then
told to take back. The girl “sat on the floor of the parlor cradling that coat and crying” Didion
recalls, and then reflects, “Although I was not born until a year after Repeal, that scene is more
‘real’ to me than many I have played myself” (STB 177). Not only is this someone else’s
memory, and one quite far removed from Didion herself, she also feels that it is “more ‘real’” to
her than many of her own personal memories.
There is irony in Didion’s use of the world “real” here; as she has just said there is “no
true memory at all”—nothing is real. A point in time that is central to Sacramento’s history is
defined for Didion by a false memory, by “traces of someone else’s memory.” The truth about
California is what Didion seeks, but California makes it impossible for that to happen. “It should
be clear by now that the truth about the place is elusive” she writes (STB 178). Didion is
assuming a certain understanding of her reader, expecting that this ineffability is “clear by now,”
and it is, largely due to her repeated insistence that this is how things are. Didion is also

	  

	  

13	  

admitting that she may never be able to fully explain the “truth” about the place. What she means
by “truth” here is uncertain; truth seems to mean history to Didion, but what specific history she
is looking for in California in not made clear.
In addition to being unsettled by her own inability to “find California now,” Didion is
also worried about later generations. The old farm town she once knew has been pushed aside by
the influx of the aerospace industry. Of the next generation, Didion writes, “Old Sacramento to
them will be something colorful, something they read about in Sunset…They will have lost the
real past and gained a manufactured one” (STB 185-186). Didion’s use of the word “colorful”
implies a lack of reality—that the image of old Sacramento will be something based more in
imagination and fantasy than truth and fact. This next generation will only know a
“manufactured past,” taken from and magazines and misshapen stories. “But,” she counters,
“Perhaps it is presumptuous of me to assume that they will be missing something. Perhaps in
retrospect this has been a story not about Sacramento at all, but about the things we lose and the
promises we break as we grow older…” (STB 186).
Just as the essay on Lucille Miller was not really about Lucille Miller, this essay is not
really “about Sacramento at all.” While the essays included in Slouching Towards Bethlehem are
investigative and journalistic, there is also an autobiographical quality to them, as Didion works
out her own internal conflicts about where she came from and who she is now. Evan Carton
writes, “In theme and structure…the seemingly disparate and documentary essays in Slouching
Towards Bethlehem comprise an attempt at autobiography in a world where…the self can be
approached only indirectly through and in material facts, external landscapes, public discourse,
the stories of others, and where the text gives rise to the life.”17 Didion relies on all of these
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17

Carton, 37.

	  

	  

14	  

elements to indirectly tackle her own life in “Notes from A Native Daughter.” She realizes “in
retrospect” instead of being about Sacramento, this essay is it is actually about her fears of
getting older and losing the past. One must wonder if Didion has consciously forgotten things, as
the dreamers she so condemns do.
The essay titled “Los Angeles Notebook” contains vignettes, each one a quick but
profound glance into an element that Didion feels appropriately defines the city. In one vignette,
she places her reader in the afternoon prior to the start of the Santa Ana winds. “There is
something uneasy in the Los Angeles air this afternoon, some unnatural stillness, some tension”
(STB 217), she says. This feeling in the “Los Angeles air” is a collective feeling, and it is both
physical and emotional. Didion sets this up as though it is a scene in a horror film; everything is
eerily still and one can feel that something violent and dramatic is about to take over Los
Angeles. She writes,
Los Angles weather is the weather of catastrophe, of apocalypse, and, just as the reliably
long and bitter winters of New England determine the way life is lived there, so the
violence and the unpredictability of the Santa Ana affect the entire quality of life in Los
Angeles, accentuate its impermanence, its unreliability. The wind shows us how close to
the edge we are (STB 221).
The violent weather of Los Angeles is indicative of the end. There is an absoluteness to Didion’s
language as she says it is “apocalyp[tic]” and “catastroph[ic]” in its nature. She also notes the
sometimes 100 miles an hour gusts have, in the past, led to mountains burning, injuries from
flying objects, death caused by the wind’s affects on cars, as well as death caused by wind’s
effects on mental health. This weather condition disturbs the “entire quality of life in Los
Angeles,” it takes control of the city and its inhabitants, and shows just how fragile and

	  

	  

15	  

“imperman[ent]” the city is. The power Didion gives to the Santa Ana winds allows the reader to
share the collective feeling of the people of Los Angeles. The horrific uncertainty and violent
weight Didion suspends above the reader leaves us feeling as though we too are waiting for the
Santa Ana winds to start tonight, waiting for the end to come. Of course, Didion is projecting a
bit here, to an extent that may seem overly dramatic. Her language of absoluteness overreaches
at times, but there is something that is still very persuasive here. This persuasiveness comes from
her cinematic-like structure; she zooms in in a way that engulfs the audience entirely, allowing
the reader to go along with her and imagine the weight of this defining character of Los Angeles.
In “Slouching Towards Bethlehem,” the title essay of this collection, Didion acts as an
ethnographer of the Haight-Ashbury hippie culture, relying heavily on collected data that shows
the grim reality of another cultural fantasy that is sentimentalized by the American public.
Didion presents a culture of young drug addicts, missing children, and crime. She opens the
essay with, “The center was not holding” (STB 84), referencing antother line from the Yeats
poem she borrows the book’s title from. Didion feels that this lack of cohesion is present
throughout the entire country, which is why she is compelled to go to San Francisco, where, she
says, “social hemorrhaging was showing up” (STB 85).
The glimpses Didion gives into the reality of the hippie culture are powerful, and her
presumed project to puncture cultural fantasies is perhaps achieved to the fullest extent here. She
relays images that dispel the romanticized illusion of hippie culture being all about peace, love
and flower children; at one point, she is handed a flier for class on “How to Avoid Getting
Busted, Gangbangs, VD, Rape, Pregnancy, Beatings, and Starvation” and is told, “You oughta
come…you’ll need it” (STB 114). Later on, she meets a five year old named Susan whose mother
“has given her both acid and peyote” for a year now (STB 128).

	  

	  

16	  

And yet, the “center” does not “hold” in this essay. What is missing from this essay is
Didion herself. She appears so far removed from the people she meets and the things she sees
that it is if she is not there at all. Didion relies heavily on dialogue she gathers from the hippies,
and while it gives an honest picture of the time and place, it all feels lackluster without her usual
passion and urgency. The reader can feel Didion’s nerves, those nerves that drive her to chase
what she writes about, in “Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream,” and “Los Angeles Notebook,”
as well as in nearly every other essay in this collection. But as grim as the subject matter is in
this title essay, it is hard to hear Didion’s nerves.
In The Art of Fact, Barbara Lounsberry aptly notes that in Slouching Towards Bethlehem
Didion establishes the idea of “glittering mirages” that exist in our world. Lounsberry says, “It is
the lack of self-knowledge, as well as ignorance of the historical past, that makes one susceptible
to mirage, Didion seems to imply.”18 In Slouching Towards Bethlehem, Didion begins a project
that is carried on through her voice in all of work: an investigation into our culture’s relationship
with reality and imagination, in which all perceived fact is questioned in an attempt to save us
from these “glittering mirages.”

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18

Barbara Lounsberry, The Art of Fact: Contemporary Artists of Nonfiction, (New York: Greenwood, 1990) 111.

	  

	  

17	  

The White Album

In 1979, eleven years after Slouching Towards Bethlehem was released, Didion published
another collection of essays, titled The White Album.19 The title likely comes from the Beatles
album of the same name, released during the time Didion writes about. The White Album is
broken up into five sections: “The White Album,” “California Republic,” “Women,” “Sojourns,”
and “On the Morning After the Sixties.” In The White Album, Didion’s writing is far more
autobiographical than in Slouching, as she attempts to work out for herself, and in turn for her
reader, what made certain images from the end of the 1960s stick with her. In “Why I Write,”
Didion says, "I write entirely to find out what I'm thinking, what I'm looking at, what I see and
what it means. What I want and what I fear...What is going on in these pictures in my mind?"20
In the title essay of The White Album, Didion reflects on and attempts to work though
different “pictures” that felt irrevocably stuck in her mind during the 1960s. She talks about
sitting in on The Doors in a recording session, meeting with the Black Panthers, and visiting
former Manson family member Linda Kasabian. When discussing where her mind was during
this period, Didion writes, “I was meant to know the plot, but all I knew was what I saw: flash
pictures in variable sequence, images with no ‘meaning’ beyond their temporary arrangement,
not a movie but a cutting-room experience” (WA 13). Didion is using the word “plot” as
metonymy for the structured, consequential life that she is supposed to have but does not.
Instead, she sees “flash pictures” that seem to connect in some untraceable way. She cannot find
the meaning behind these images that stick with her, or why they even go together; a “cutting	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19

All citations from The White Album are to: Joan Didion, The White Album, (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1979).
20
Joan Didion, "Why I Write," New York Times Book Review (Dec. 1976): 6.

	  

	  

18	  

room experience,” she calls these spliced pictures. These “flash pictures,” which become a
frequent theme in the Didion’s writing, are what Mark Z. Muggli, in “The Poetics of Joan
Didion’s Journalism,” refers to as “Didion’s emblems.”21
Didion gives a series of “flash pictures,” or emblems, from her time in Hawaii, both in
the title essay that opens the collection, and in the essay titled “In the Islands.” For her, the
“pictures” are all associated with Hawaii, but none of them have anything to do with the place
itself; they all have to do with news from home, or people from home. She recalls reading news
from California and running into famous Los Angeles drag queens, and she gives us these “flash
pictures” without any further elaboration.
“Another flash cut:” Didion writes, and then proceeds to copy over a page long
psychiatric report about an unnamed patient. It is only after the report is presented that Didion
writes, “The patient to whom this psychiatric report refers is me” (WA 14-15). It appears that
Didion feels more comfortable giving her reader “flash cuts,” or flash pictures, rather than giving
images with full backgrounds and meanings clearly laid out. This technique of omission, or a
reliance on implication rather than stated fact, is seen in many of Didion’s works, including
Salvador and Miami. This method allows Didion to avoid rhetorical cliché, and to stay somewhat
removed from her subject (especially since she has already stated that these images that stick
with her are things she fears). Having the revelation that the report belongs to Didion come after
the fact also allows the reader to examine it as its own entity; it can be read the way Didion sees
it, as a “flash cut” without meaning. However, whether or not we know this is her own report
from the start, it is still a psychiatric report, and still evokes certain feelings and opinions—
meaning can hardly be ignored. Does Didion’s structure imply that we are meant to read this
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21

Mark Z. Muggli, "The Poetics of Joan Didion's Journalism," American Literature 59.3 (1987): 402.

	  

	  

19	  

report for what it is and nothing more? It appears that she is assuming something of her reader
here, but what that is, she does not make clear.
Didion recalls having a line from Ezra Pound’s “In a Station of the Metro” stuck in her
head in 1968, the words being “Petals on a wet black bough.” She says they were “…six words
which had no significance for me but which seemed that year to signal the onset of anxiety or
fright” (WA 36). Didion has no explanation for why this specific line was so engraved in her
mind at this time, nor does she know why it incited feelings of “anxiety” and “fright.” She does
not expand much upon this; she briefly talks about hearing “too many people who spoke
favorably about bombing power stations” (WA 36) at that time, but does not relate the two
sentiments. By refusing to consider what relevance this has to her, and then moving away from
the idea so quickly, Didion again gives her reader a glimpse into her mind filled with flash cuts.
The specific line that was stuck in Didion’s head is almost beside the fact, as the notion that any
line of words could somehow rouse such feelings of fear and worry within her speaks to what
was going on in her mind at this time.
As Didion attempts to reason with herself about these images she comes to a realization
about herself as an observer of the world. She writes,
During the years when I found it necessary to revise the circuitry of my mind I
discovered that I was no longer interested in whether the woman on the ledge outside the
window on the sixteenth floor jumped or did not jump, or in why. I was interested only in
the picture of her in my mind: her hair incandescent in the flood-lights, her bare toes
curled inward on the stone ledge (WA 44).
In these years, these “flash cuts,” “emblems,” or “shimmering images,” (as she refers to them in
“Why I Write”) are the only thing Didion really trusts. She is not interested in the meaning

	  

	  

20	  

behind what she sees; she is interested only in the picture that sticks with her in her mind. So this
woman, standing on the sixteenth floor, who may or may not end her life, is just a picture, not a
story.
Didion’s lack of interest in the “story,” her trust in the fragment over the whole, is
something she believes to be an issue in these years. At the start of the essay Didion says, “We
tell ourselves stories in order to live…we live entirely, especially if we are writers, by the
imposition of a narrative line upon disparate images, by the ideas with which we have learned to
freeze the shifting phantasmagoria which is our actual experience” (WA 11). Didion believes that
writers live with a constant burden of a forced narrative line connecting various images. The
“shifting phantasmagoria,” images that make up the writer’s real life, must be frozen over and
over again by the writer; he or she subsists on these stories alone. However, she notes, “or at
least we do for a while. I am talking here about a time when I started to doubt the premises of all
the stories I had ever told myself” (WA 11). In “The White Album,” it appears that Didion is
trying to reconcile this issue of her interest in “flash cut” over story, and her doubt in the validity
of any freezing. Strangely, she does this by presenting them as flash cuts to her reader, but
perhaps this is in an effort to clear her mind of them. As we will see later, this is also the result of
Didion’s distrust of the forced narrative line, and of narrative convention in general.
Muggli argues that Didion is at times guilty of inventing details in The White Album, a
common critique of New Journalism.22 He references the essay titled “Many Mansions,” in
which Didion writes about the new California governor’s mansion that has not been lived in
since construction ended in 1975. The mansion, built by Ronald and Nancy Regan, is
“unlandscaped, unfurnished and unoccupied” (WA 67). However, in describing the interiors of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
22

Muggli, 405.

	  

	  

21	  

the house, Didion writes, “In the entire house there are only enough bookshelves for a set of the
World Book and some Books of the Month, plus maybe three Royal Doulton figurines and a
back file of Connoisseur” (WA 69). Muggi says, “Didion has not seen these books and knickknacks; she has hypothesized them as the possessions typical of people like the Reagans.”23
Didion is indeed conjecturing here; she is going beyond the facts for illustrative purposes. This
does create a more expressive image of the mansion, and it also serves as commentary on
American society—these are generalized possessions of the wealthy American intellectual. But
this also problematizes Didion’s quest to penetrate illusion and imagination to get at reality and
truth. However, does Didion’s language really make her less truthful? Her pointed diction and
mocking tone, particularly when she says, “plus maybe three Royal Doulton figurines,” seems to
imply that this is all conjecture and that she is not trying to deceive anyone. Her voice seems to
imply an assumption (perhaps unfairly) that the reader knows she is merely hypothesizing.
In the essay titled "In the Islands,” Didion, on a flight from Los Angeles to Honolulu,
realizes what type of story she is looking to find in the life going on around her. She notices a
man on the airplane say to his wife, “you are driving me to murder,” and then rushing off before
takeoff (WA 144). Didion then notes, “I do not know whether the man reboarded the plane before
takeoff or whether the woman came on to Honolulu alone, but I thought about it all the way
across the Pacific” (WA 144). She continues to think about this, and then finally realizes what
irks her so much about the scene,
I disliked it because it had the aspect of a short story, one of those “little epiphany”
stories in which the main character glimpses a crisis in a stranger’s life…and is moved to
see his or her own life in a new light. I was not going to Honolulu because I wanted to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23

Muggli, 405.

	  

	  

22	  

see life reduced to a short story. I was going to Honolulu because I wanted to see life
expanded to a novel, and I still do. I wanted room for flowers, and reef fish, and people
who may or may not be driving one another to murder but in any case are not impelled,
by the demands of narrative convention, to say so out loud on the 8:45 A.M Pan
American to Honolulu (WA 145).
For Didion, a person declaring “you are driving me to murder” is interesting material, but not in
the circumstances in which she sees it here. She wants the comment to be one detail of a larger
story, “life expanded to a novel” rather than “life reduced to a short story.” In a short story, this
comment would serve as a cliché “little epiphany” for the main character who hears it to look at
her life in a new way. In a novel (at least one written by Didion), this would be a detail on the
same level as “flowers” and “fish”—a part of nature, a fact of life. Here we get a glimpse at an
answer to why Didion favors the fragment over the whole. She distrusts “narrative convention,”
because it seems to deny the reality of the world we live in. This is one of the main reasons why
Didion’s voice is so compelling, and at the same time, so limited. Didion, in both her nonfiction
and fiction, favors a reliance on implication or omission over any sort of explicit content or
structure that may seem to follow a generic literary formula. When she talks about the Pound line
that was so stuck in her mind, she does not try to come up with reasons for why it stuck with her,
she does not state when she first heard it, and she does not say when the line stopped inciting
anxiety within her. She omits these elements and thus avoids the narrative convention of a
cohesive story with a beginning, middle and end. This voice and style choice takes on an
important meaning in Salvador and Miami, as Didion uses the unsaid and the hinted at to form a
kind of conspiracy with her reader.
In “Why I Write,” Didion says the “pictures in [her] mind” are the “images that

	  

	  

23	  

“shimmer” for her. She writes,
There used to be an illustration in every elementary psychology book showing a cat
drawn by a patient in varying stages of schizophrenia. This cat had a shimmer around it.
You could see the molecular structure breaking down at the very edges of the cat: the cat
became the background and the background the cat, everything interacting, exchanging
ions. People on hallucinogens describe the same perception of objects. I’m not a
schizophrenic, nor do I take hallucinogens, but certain images do shimmer for me. Look
hard enough, and you can’t miss the shimmer. It’s there. You can’t think too much about
these pictures that shimmer. You just lie low and let them develop. You stay quiet. You
don’t talk to many people and you keep your nervous system from shorting out and you
try to locate the cat in the shimmer, the grammar in the picture.24

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24

Joan Didion, "Why I Write," New York Times Book Review (Dec. 1976): 7.

	  

	  

24	  

CHAPTER II: Romance of the Political Tropics

Salvador

In June of 1982, Didion spent two weeks in El Salvador recording what she saw. Present
for the peak of the civil war, Didion witnessed body dumps, death squads, severe political
repression, corrupt and distrustful government, and the pervasive feeling of terror that seemed at
that time to define the place. The Salvadoran Civil War, which spanned 1979-1992, saw the
Salvadoran government and it’s appointed military going against leftist revolutionaries and
guerrilla armies. Military death squads—right-wing groups spearheaded by the Salvadoran
government, the United States government and the CIA—killed anyone assumed to be even
tangentially involved in guerrilla efforts. Numerous civilian causalities came out of this conflict,
most notably, the assassination of Archbishop Óscar Romero, shot while saying mass in church.
Romero had been openly against death squads, and had even reached out to President Carter
begging him to stop providing U.S. military aid to El Salvador.25
Under President Reagan, the U.S. government’s fear of Communist growth in Central
America, and their belief that the Salvadoran military could prevent it, led to an even greater
surge in U.S. financial and military aid to El Salvador.26 On December 11th 1981, the
Salvadorian Army killed between 700 and 1,000 people in the village of El Mozote, many of
them women, children and the elderly. The United States’ financial and military aid to the
Salvadoran government during this time was publically known, but both countries initially
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25

William Blum, Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, (Monroe, Me.: Common
Courage, 1995) 356.
26
"El Salvador: Civil War." PBS. PBS, n.d. Web. 31 Mar. 2014.

	  

	  

25	  

denied and attempted to cover up the killings.27 Didion’s report first appeared in parts, under the
title “In El Salvador,” in the November 1982 issue of the New York Review of Books; a year later,
it was published in book form as Salvador.
In Salvador, Didion’s reporting style is tightly constructed and her language and
structure wholly capture the disturbing nature of the place.28 El Salvador is at once meticulously
observed and kept at a distance by Didion; she uses facts to imply judgments, careful not to voice
her opinion or get too emotionally involved in her report. While she keeps herself distanced from
her subject, she does have multiple self-realizations about herself as a journalist and as an
American in El Salvador. Didion attempts to penetrate the illusions surrounding the political
atrocities at hand through the study of language, specifically how those in power use certain
words and phrases as tools for manipulation.
Didion constructs the physical and theoretical landscape of El Salvador in terms of terror,
which she sees as being the country’s defining characteristic. She does this through an evocative
tone and cautious, allusion-driven language. “Terror is the given of the place” (Salvador 14), she
states early on. Didion’s declaration is absolute and establishes the state of affairs in El Salvador,
but it is also pointedly withholding, in a familiar Didion mode. She follows this with images of
police cars and “fingers always on triggers, safeties clicking on and off. Aim…taken as if to pass
the time” (Salvador 15). Didion begins to shape this reality, allowing the images to imply that
terror is not just a fleeting phenomenon, but a permanent fact of life in El Salvador—fingers are
“always” on the triggers. This sense of violence as the norm is furthered by “safeties clicking on
and off” and “aim…taken as if to pass the time,” as though the handing of a gun is a mindless
act. Didion’s close up on the detail is done in a cinematic way, like when she writes about the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27
28

Blum 359.
All citations from Salvador are to: Joan Didion, Salvador, (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982).	  

	  

	  

26	  

Santa Anas in The White Album. Here, this method works to heighten the drama of the situation
and convey the abstract issues of who has the power and how it is used, without explicitly saying
it. Didion uses the “fingers on triggers,” as synecdoche for hands on guns, ready to shoot,
ultimately signifying a murderous power.
Didion draws on her own personal anxieties that result from encounters with terror in El
Salvador, constructing reality for her reader in an even more palpable, truthful way. In a parking
lot after a meeting, Didion and a few other reporters find themselves facing two young boys on
motorcycles, one with a “G-3 propped between his thighs” (Salvador 104). She notes a
conundrum: if she and the reporters try to leave, the situation will get worse, but the same will
happen if they stay. The driver eventually pulls out quickly and takes them away from the scene.
“Nothing more happened,” Didion reflects, “and what did happen had been a common enough
kind of incident in El Salvador, a pointless confrontation with aimless authority, but I have heard
of no solución that precisely addresses this local vocation for terror” (Salvador 104). Didion’s
language appears nonchalant, calling what happened a “pointless confrontation with aimless
authority,” but her tone is loaded with tension. Even though nothing happens to her and the other
reporters, the larger point is about the reality that danger can be found anywhere, even when
doing something as seemingly benign as leaving a parking lot. Didion ironically says there is
“local vocation for terror,” illuminating once again what a natural occurrence this is, that inciting
fear has become a honed skill in El Salvador. Didion says she has heard of no “solución” for the
prevalence of this terror, using the Spanish word for solution for a pointed reason; this is the
vocabulary of Salvadoran bureaucratic impotence—“solución” means no solution at all.
Didion’s highly stylized writing—her conscious diction, emphasis on details, and close
ups on action—show that she is especially aware how place functions in the world she is

	  

	  

27	  

constructing for her reader on the page. Instead of explicitly stating the nature of the political
atmosphere in El Salvador, she turns to the landscape itself. The Metropolitan Cathedral is in
excessively poor condition; Didion notes exposed wiring and “fluorescent tubes hang[ing]
askew” (Salvador 79). She writes, “In this vast brutalist space that was the cathedral, the unlit
altar seemed to offer a single ineluctable message: at this time and in this place the light of the
world could be constructed as out, off, extinguished” (Salvador 79).
Didion uses the lack of light in the cathedral as a fathomable example of the political
disorder in El Salvador. The light of the world can be cut off just as easily as it is in the
cathedral—“out, off, extinguished.” Didion accepts the symbolic value of the cathedral’s
condition, and then uses the details as metonymy for the dismal nature of the country. She goes
on to develop her metaphor for the cathedral, saying, “Many Salvadorans are offended by the
Metropolitan Cathedral which is as it should be, because the place remains perhaps the only
ambiguous political statement in El Salvador, a metaphorical bomb in the ultimate power
station” (Salvador 80). Didion bluntly states that the Salvadorans are right to be offended by the
cathedral, as she believes that it is, among the bounty of loud and clear political statements in El
Salvador, the only one that is “ambiguous.” What exactly Didion means by “ambiguous” is
somewhat unclear. She states later that she knows this is the cathedral where Archbishop
Romero’s funeral was held, during which numerous people were killed, so it appears she is being
coy by using the word “ambiguous.” The cathedral is a “bomb in the ultimate power station”
because its condition reveals the impotence of the Salvadoran government, and illuminates the
fact that there is no safe haven in El Salvador, not even in the church.
Didion further shapes this landscape by ironically showing how information received by
a visitor in El Salvador is different from the typical tourist information. She says,

	  

	  

28	  

There is a special kind of practical information that the visitor to El Salvador acquires
immediately, the way visitors to other places acquire information about the “currency
rates,” the hours for the museums. In El Salvador one learns that vultures go first for the
soft tissue, for the eyes, the exposed genitalia, the open mouth. One learns that an open
mouth can be used to make a specific point, can be stuffed with something emblematic;
stuffed, say, with a penis, or if the point had to do with land title, stuffed with some of the
dirt in question. One learns that hair deteriorates less rapidly than flesh, and that a skull
surrounded by a perfect corona of hair is a not uncommon sight in the body dumps
(Salvador 17).
Didion’s words are laced with both irony and dismay. This “practical information,” is of course
not practical at all, least of all to a visitor. This information, which she details graphically, is
what the visitor learns in lieu of museum times and currency rates. It is what is spoken about (or
even seen), what visitors (one would assume unwittingly) start to pick up; it is the information
that consumes the place defined by terror. Didion employs repetition, saying “one learns” over
and over, as a way to emphasize the point, to reify this truth as she sees it and to make it a truth
for her reader. Didion uses this blunt and literal language to show how bodies are used as
statements in El Salvador; she sees what happens to them as a political rhetoric of the military
and the government.
However, as convincing as Didion’s language is, one must question if what she is
presenting is really a collectively agreed upon reality, whether this is actually the “information”
that visitors receive. Didion is not just a visitor in El Salvador; she is a journalist, and one that is
pointedly looking for something. It is absolutely possible that Didion is generalizing this idea
that the visitor to El Salvador learns this “special kind of practical information…immediately.”

	  

	  

29	  

While it is without debate that the terror in El Salvador is widespread and visible, this
information about the treatment of bodies and the body dumps as a whole seems like information
Didion may have sought out herself, or listened a little closer than the average visitor to find.
And yet, this rhetorical effect works to Didion’s advantage. Even if this information is not
something every visitor learns immediately, it is something Didion feels is too normal, too
spoken about, and too widespread as it is. Her tone and her reification through repetition, as well
as her mission to not spare any detail, no matter how graphic it may be, lets the reader see what
Didion sees. Not only that, but the reader is now made aptly aware of what Didion fears; she
must construct, solidify and examine this truth for her reader because she is afraid of it.
Throughout most of Salvador, Didion lets suggestive images imply her judgments,
maintaining a distance from the politics at hand by not directly commenting on them. Even when
she does speak from personal experience, as with her own encounters with the terror, she avoids
stating her opinion directly. When Didion speaks of body dumps in El Salvador she begins with
a description full of horrific detail, aptly illuminating their brutal nature. Again, her tone implies
their normalcy, as she tries to make the larger point that these body dumps are far too easily
taken as the norm. Didion refers to one specific body dump as a “lunar lava field of rotting
human flesh” (Salvador 19). She says this matter-of-factly, but her language conveys the horrific
nature of the scene. The words “lunar” and “lava” bring to mind not only something eruptive, but
otherworldly, making the image of rotting flesh all the more intense and unnatural. Didion goes
on to mention another body dump, one in Puerta del Diablo that is “…described as recently as
the April-July 1982 issue of Aboard TACA, the magazine provided passengers on the national
airline of El Salvador, as ‘offering excellent subjects for color photography’” (Salvador 19).

	  

	  

30	  

By juxtaposing the “lunar lava field of rotting human flesh” with this quote from
Aboard, Didion presents this great irony, allowing the reader to see how ludicrously El Salvador
tries to deny its atrocities, especially to its visitors. Her presentation of this irony also lets the
reader gather her personal opinion; from the structure of this passage it is clear that she is
appalled by this denial of body dumps, but as a journalist she stays removed by not having to
come out and say so point blank. It does not seem that Didion fears stating her own opinion, but
rather that she finds greater poignancy in letting these truths speak for themselves. Didion,
always trusting of her reading and forever in avoidance of the narrative cliché, seems to assume
that her reader will glean from her irony the horrific reality of El Salvador and her feelings about
it.
Didion employs this method again when reporting on a meeting of Salvadoran writers
that she is invited to at the American embassy. In relaying what was said during the gathering,
rather than summarizing the conversation or repeating quotes and attributing them to specific
people, she says, “These are some of the sentences spoken to me that morning…” and proceeds
to list them (Salvador 83). “Sentences” is the most neutral word Didion could possibly use to
describe the conversation. In this way, she is able to subtly show her skepticism towards these
people and their thoughts about the state of El Salvador, without having to specifically state it.
The bulk of the “sentences” that Didion records from that meeting are about how
“intellectual life is drying up,” with almost no mention of the actual horrors going on (Salvador
83). At the end of the list of “sentences,” Didion notes, “The cultural attaché from the embassy
said that she, for one, would like to see this café literario close on a hopeful note, and someone
provided one: it was a hopeful note that norteamericanos and centroamericanos could have such
a meeting. This is what passed for a hopeful note in San Salvador in the summer of 1982.”

	  

	  

31	  

(Salvador 84). Again Didion lets the facts speak for themselves. She repeats the phrase “hopeful
note” three times, each instance conveying more irony than the last. This repetition works to
show her own opinion; she seems to find irony in the idea that this could constitute a “hopeful
note,” and in the idea of any hopeful note existing for El Salvador at this time.
El Salvador is a place where Didion experiences many self-realizations, some that occur
at the scene, and some that occur retrospectively as she records her findings. These selfrealizations show what a large impact El Salvador has on Didion, and speak to her epistemic
insecurities. At one point during her visit, Didion meets with Victor Barriere, the grandson of a
notoriously cruel former Salvadoran dictator, General Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez. She
reports that Barriere has enormous respect for his grandfather, a man who ruthlessly killed
thousands of citizens in 1932. Barriere also tells her about a young foreign boy whom he lets
hang around his studio in order to “keep him from getting killed” (Salvador 56). Barriere’s desire
to protect this boy from being killed is outstandingly ironic given his blithe spirit in regard to his
grandfather’s senseless massacres.
However, Didion does not explicitly call this out. Instead, she notes, “It occurred to me
that this was the first time in my life that I had been in the presence of obvious ‘material’ and felt
no professional exhilaration at all, only personal dread” (Salvador 56). Something so mindblowingly ironic would typically make for great writing, what Didion calls “obvious material,”
but instead she is so completely dumbfounded by Barriere’s contradictions that she feels only
“personal dread.” It is apparent that this place, and the people who perpetuate the terror within it
are taking a toll on Didion, and making her reconsider who she is as a journalist; an element that
would typically make for great journalism elsewhere is, in El Salvador, a mark of the violence
that Didion fears.

	  

	  

32	  

Didion comes to a similar realization about her writing while taking notes at the main
shopping mall in El Salvador. She first relays a copious inventory (similar to the one she gives in
Slouching) of everything she sees and hears at the mall. She then says,
This was a shopping center that embodied the future for which El Salvador was
presumably being saved, and I wrote it down dutifully, this being the kind of ‘color’ I
knew how to interpret, the kind of inductive irony, the detail that was supposed to
illuminate the story. As I wrote it down I realized that I was no longer much interested in
this kind of irony, that this was a story that would not be illuminated by such details, that
this was a story that would perhaps not be illuminated at all, that this was perhaps even
less a ‘story’ than a true noche oscura (Salvador 36).
The mall is supposed to stand for the promising capitalist and consumer future of El Salvador,
and just as she does when speaking to Barriere, Didion notices that this irony is “the detail that
was supposed to illuminate the story,” and make for great journalism. However, as she
experiences with Barriere as well, the irony that she normally embraces seems unusable to her.
Didion has proven herself successful at constructing El Salvador through vibrant irony, but in
these cases, it appears that the situation in El Salvador has become too raw and too real to her to
be treated as a fluffy piece layered with these ironic details. Didion seems to be fighting against
this personal emotional attachment she is starting to develop towards El Salvador. She refers to
her report on El Salvador as, more than anything else, a “noche oscura,” a dark night, that
invokes something within her that seems dark as well. Her reporting alludes to this tortured state,
to some inner-doubt and turmoil. This personal darkness, and Didion’s awareness of it, is what
drives (or perhaps inhibits) her writing in Salvador, and makes it different than something like
her less impassioned exploration of the hippies in Slouching Towards Bethlehem.

	  

	  

33	  

Didion comes to another important self-realization when considering words of advice
given to her before leaving for El Salvador. The advice comes from a Salvadoran woman who
works for her in Los Angeles. The woman, who has had family members killed in their beds,
tells Didion exactly what to avoid, to which Didion says, “I assured her that we would
remember, we would be careful, we would in fact be so careful that we would probably (trying
for a light touch) spend all our time in church” (Salvador 78). Didion hopes that this comment
about the church will put her employee at ease, thinking of the church as a universally safe place.
However, she recalls that her employee became “agitated…and I realized that I had spoken as a
norteamericana: churches had not been to this woman the neutral ground they had been to me”
(Salvador 78). Here we return to Didion’s knowledge of the Metropolitan Cathedral and the way
it reflects the complete lack of safe spaces in El Salvador. Churches are not a “neutral ground” to
a Salvadoran as they are to a “norteamericana.”
Didion then reflects on what a church means to someone from El Salvador. She says, “I
must remember: Archbishop Romero killed saying mass in the chapel of the Divine Providence
Hospital in San Salvador. I must remember: more than thirty people killed at Archbishop
Romero’s funeral in the Metropolitan Cathedral in San Salvador” (Salvador 78). Twice more she
repeats this phrase, “I must remember,” followed by more evidence of the lack of neutrality or
safety in Salvadoran churches. Finally she says, “I must understand: the Church was dangerous.”
This is an interesting technique, as she is repeating something the Salvadoran woman said to her
(she is the one telling Didion what she must “remember” and “understand”) but in structuring it
this way, Didion makes it into a chant, as though she is trying to condition herself to
“remember,” to “understand,” and to get rid of the limited and deluded norteamericana outlook

	  

	  

34	  

on how things are. To understand El Salvador, Didion must forget what she already thinks she
knows.
At lunch at the American ambassador’s house, Didion again feels herself fall prey to
American illusion about El Salvador. She recalls,
I have thought since about this lunch a great deal. The wine was chilled and poured into
crystal glasses. The fish was served on porcelain plates that bore the American eagle. The
sheep dog and the crystal and the American eagle together had on me a certain anesthetic
effect, temporarily deadening that receptivity to the sinister that afflicts everyone in
Salvador, and I experienced for a moment the official American delusion, the illusion of
plausibility, the sense that the American undertaking in El Salvador might turn out to be,
from the right angle, in the right light, just another difficult but possible mission in
another troubled but possible country (Salvador 88).
Everything present at this lunch—“the sheep dog and the crystal and the American eagle”—is
emblematic of American material wealth, and to witness it in a place that is the very antithesis of
that is a shock to the system for Didion. It all temporarily numbs her, inviting her into what she
is familiar with, and momentarily forcing her to forget the horrific reality of life in El Salvador.
Among these safe emblems of Americana, Didion experiences the “illusion of plausibility.”
From this lofty and delusional perch (or what Didion refers to as “from the right angle, in the
right light”) she is tricked into believing that things aren’t really as bad as they seem, that the
problems within El Salvador will eventually be solved by the U.S. government. This is, of
course, the reality of the American perception of El Salvador. By admitting that she too can
easily fall into this delusion, Didion is able to make the point that change is needed, and that the
American government must stop shrouding reality in illusion.

	  

	  

35	  

This passage also raises the question of what Didion does and does not know about the
United States effort in El Salvador. She never explicitly states what the United States’ foreign
policy in El Salvador is, nor does she directly address the manner of the CIA intervention, but
her perpetually ironic and skeptical tone makes it hard to believe that she is unaware. It may be
that Didion does not feel that she can confidentially make these claims, or that she is unfairly
assuming that information about the U.S. foreign policy and the CIA intervention is a given.
However, it seems more likely that she does not lay these things out because she is more
interested in the “shimmering images.” She is concerned with illuminating the micro moments;
she close reads to show that something is happening. But her lack of clarity does continue to
complicate the truth she seems so desperate to impart.
In The Art of Fact, Barbara Lounsberry says that “…in Salvador Didion is more explicit
than in any of her other nonfiction in criticizing America’s misperception.”29 The word “explicit”
is a curious choice, as almost all of Didion’s criticism is implicit. However, Lounsberry does
point to passage in which Didion’s voice is uncharacteristically direct. Didion writes,
That we had been drawn, both by a misapprehension of the local rhetoric and by the
manipulation of our own rhetorical weakness, into a game we did not understand, a play
of power in a political topic alien to us, seemed apparent, and yet there we remained…At
the heart of the American effort there was something of the familiar ineffable, as if it
were taking place not in El Salvador but in a mirage of El Salvador, the mirage of a
society not unlike our own but “sick,” a temporarily fevered republic in which the
antibodies of democracy needed only to be encouraged…and in which there existed,
waiting to be tapped by our support, some latent good will (Salvador 96).
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
29

Lounsberry 134.

	  

	  

36	  

Rhetoric, and our “misapprehension” and “manipulation” of it, is what Didion believes propelled
us (meaning the United States government) into “a game we did not understand,” a game that is
all about playing with power. Didion says that this cause and effect “seemed apparent, and yet
there we remained.” It seems that she means this is both “apparent” to her, and to the people in
charge who perpetuate the game; it is though she is asking “how have we not changed our ways
if the problems are so obvious?" Didion’s most explicit critique of the American effort in El
Salvador is that it does not even feel like it is taking place in El Salvador, but rather, in a “mirage
of a society not unlike our own but ‘sick,’” that we so naïvely believe just needs a little bit of our
ideological input to churn out “some latent good will.” Didion is not only critiquing the
foolishness of the American government’s outlook, she is also making the point, once again, that
there is at this time no viable solution for the situation in El Salvador. El Salvador is not just
battling a quick bout of sickness that we can cure; the darkness that exists there may be too
potent to be cured at all. It seems to Didion that the United States as it is currently operating is in
no position to change things in El Salvador, and that change in general may be just a fantasy.
In Salvador, and later in Miami, Didion is intrigued by how language works, specifically,
how those in power use certain words and phrases to manipulate situations for their own benefit.
Didion frequently quotes words she hears, rarely attributing them to any particular person, to
make the point that these are words heard often, and words that should be paid more attention to.
“Disappear,” in its unusual transitive form as “to disappear,” is one of these frequently used
words that sticks with Didion. “Desaparecer,” as it is said in El Salvador, is used to denote when
the government has killed someone, for reasons left unidentified. Didion mentions a student
protest that was held in response to outrageous amounts of government spending on a “Señorita
Universo” contest. Didion reports that the government responded to the protest by

	  

	  

37	  

“disappearing” many of the protestors. She then notes, parenthetically, “‘Desaparecer’, or
‘disappear,’ is in Spanish both an intransitive and a transitive verb, and this flexibility has been
adopted by those speaking English in El Salvador, as in John Sullivan was disappeared from the
Sheraton; the government disappeared the students, there being no equivalent situation, and so
no equivalent word, in English-speaking cultures” (Salvador 57).
Didion is intrigued by the flexibility of this verb because it speaks so directly to the
culture and state of affairs in El Salvador. To speak of “disappearing” people is not part of the
language in English-speaking cultures, nor, as far as Didion is concerned, is the act itself. This is
a word that is unique to El Salvador and used by its government; it has become a colloquial
idiom. She says that the word has been “adopted by those speaking English in El Salvador,”
implying it’s increased use, and perhaps that U.S. citizens are also being “disappeared.” That this
word is spoken so casually by anyone is something Didion believes is worth attention. It is made
clear by the urgency in her tone that she fears the power false language has to obscure reality.
Didion calls into question other words used by the Salvadoran government that are rarely
looked at critically, specifically the words the government uses when talking about solutions that
do not actually exist. These words are “reorganization,” or “improvement,” or “perfection,”
words Didion believes “tend to signal the presence of the ineffable” (Salvador 64). By using this
flat vocabulary, the government is able to suggest what it does not have the ability or the will to
speak towards, for instance, solutions for the violence in El Salvador. Didion goes on to say,
“Language as it is now used in El Salvador is the language of advertising, of persuasion, of the
product being one or another of the soluciones crafted in Washington or Panama or Mexico,
which is part of the place’s pervasive obscenity…this language is shared by Salvadorans and
Americans, as if a linguistic deal had been cut” (Salvador 65). In El Salvador, language is used

	  

	  

38	  

to promote the “product,” that being the “soluciones,” the government itself does not have.
Rather than trying to end the violence in El Salvador, these officials use language to manipulate
the public into believing that change is coming. Didion says these false “soluciones” are
“crafted” outside of El Salvador, implying that other administrations help the Salvadoran
government mask reality from its citizens with this false language. For her, this collective
construction of illusion is part of the “pervasive obscenity” of the place.
That Didion implicates the American government in this, saying the Salvadoran and
American governments treat this language as though it is a “deal” that “had been cut,” seems to
imply that she is indeed aware, in some capacity, of the nature of the United States’ aid in El
Salvador. By illuminating this mutual use of language as a veil for corruption and impotence,
Didion is able to hint at the nefarious relations between the two governments, and impart her
belief that false language breeds a false sense of reality.
Many critics have censured the length of Didion’s stay in El Salvador, believing two
weeks to be too short a time. To these critics, Sharon Felton, editor of The Critical Response to
Joan Didion counters, “One wonders exactly how many mutilated corpses, exactly how many
trips to the body dumps one needs to see in order to be convinced of the abuse—three weeks’
worth, four?”30 It is actually a testament to the state of affairs in El Salvador that Didion was able
to see such profound darkness in just two weeks. Perhaps a more extended stay would have
given her more material, or a grander perspective, but Salvador is hardly lacking in either.
Other critics have accused Didion of using Salvador as a platform to promote her own
political standpoint. Mark Falcoff, in an article for Commentary, writes that Didion “makes the
tiny republic of El Salvador into a mirror reflecting her own basic contempt for liberal
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30	  Sharon

	  	  

Felton, Introdution to The Critical Response to Joan Didion, (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1994) 8.

	  

	  

39	  

democracy and—why not say it?—the American way of life.”31 It is undeniable that Didion
implies a distaste for the American government, and perhaps “the American way of life,” in
Salvador, but this “contempt” is not at the forefront of her report—in fact, as we have seen, it
appears only implicitly. Conversely, other critics have argued that Didion is too detached from
her subject because she does not offer any solutions to the problematic relations between the
United States and El Salvador. In her review of Salvador, Martina Ebert says, “This avoidance of
formulating a definitive answer constitutes Salvador’s major shortcoming.”32 Ebert is correct;
that Didion does not propose any solutions is a genuine problem with Salvador as a piece of
political criticism. However, theorizing is also not part of Didion’s project; in fact, it is the very
antithesis of it. Didion’s project in Salvador is to closely analyze everything we assume to be
“fact,” to break through the barrier of how things are presented by the U.S. and Salvadoran
governments, and to expose the reality of this horrific violence.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
31	  Felton	  8	  

32	  Martina	  Ebert,	  rev.	  of	  Salvador,	  by	  Joan	  Didion,	  Ohio	  Journal	  8.3	  (Fall/Winter	  1984-­‐1985):	  31-­‐32.	  	  	  	  	  

	  

	  

40	  

Miami

Five years after she went to El Salvador, Didion published another work exposing a
similar kind of dark violence and political turmoil, this time set in Miami. Didion’s report on
Miami was originally published in four parts in the May 1987 issue of New York Review of
Books, and then in book form later that year. Miami focuses on the Cuban exiles that arrived in
the city after the 1959 overthrow of Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista by Communist leader Fidel
Castro.33 The Cubans who came to Miami expected a short-term exile, and were optimistic that
Cuba would be liberated, however, neither hope materialized. Didion looks at the simultaneously
American and non-American city that these exiles found themselves a part of, examining the
lasting affect of the turbulent relationship between Cubans and the U.S. government post-Bay of
Pigs, as well as the cultural tensions between the “Miami Cubans” and the “Miami Anglos.” In
Miami, as in Salvador, Didion shapes the world she sees with her distinct language and style,
relying on repetition and reification, as well as a tone and structure that assumes an
understanding of her reader. She deals heavily with paranoia, subtext, conspiracy, and what she
calls the “underwater narrative” so present in the city of Miami.
Didion’s first attempt at shaping the city of Miami comes before she even arrives.
Speaking of a ritual internal experience, she says,
I never passed through security for a flight to Miami without experiencing a certain
weightlessness, a heightened wariness of having left the developed world for a more fluid
atmosphere, one in which the native distrust of extreme possibilities that tended to ground

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
33

All citations from Miami are to: Joan Didion, Miami, (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987).

	  

	  

41	  

the temperate United States in an obeisance to democratic institutions seemed rooted, if at
all, only shallowly (Miami 23).
Didion juxtaposes the “developed world,” the world that presumably includes everything that is
not Miami, with the “fluid atmosphere” of Miami. It does not seem that Didion means to say
Miami is “undeveloped,” but that it lacks an element found in the “developed world”—solidity.
In Miami, the “native distrust of extreme possibilities” that exists elsewhere in the U.S. barely
exists, and when it does, it exists “only shallowly.” From this it is clear that the “developed
world,” to Didion, is developed in terms of its democratic institutions. Didion shares with the
reader the anxiety she experiences when moving from one “world” into the other, an anxiety
heightened by the fact that she says this happens every time she flies to Miami. She feels “a
certain weightlessness, a heightened wariness,” a pervasive feeling in her prose throughout
Miami. Establishing this anxiety from the start tells the reader about Didion’s interest in this
project to begin with; as we see in Salvador, Didion likes to chase what she fears.
Didion continues to construct Miami for her reader in terms of its instability. She says,
“…Miami seemed not a city at all but a tale, a romance of the tropics, a kind of waking dream in
which any possibility could and would be accommodated” (Miami 33). It is always Didion’s aim
to construct place in a fathomable way; we often see her attempting to reify a given landscape
through the presentation of names and emblematic images, so it can then be properly examined.
In Miami, Didion complicates this, as she seems to struggle to find any material with which to
shape the city for her reader. Her structure shows her uneasiness; as she develops her thoughts
about Miami, she improves upon her word choice (going from “a tale,” to “a romance of the
tropics” to “a kind of waking dream”), each term representing something less stable than the last.

	  

	  

42	  

While El Salvador was defined by terror for Didion, in Miami she finds the defining
factor to stem from its dissonant culture. Sharon Felton notes, “Miami embodies a different
variety of the chasm, the rifts born from cultural clash that defines the city. The…major ethnic
groups…exist in uneasy harmony, in a precarious chorus that threatens to turn discordant at the
merest infringement.”34
To really capture the culture of Miami, Didion first deals with the tensions that arise from
the reality of an overwhelming Cuban presence existing in an American city. She speaks of the
members of Brigade 2506, the group of Cuban exiles formed by the CIA in 1960 to overthrow
Fidel Castro’s Cuban government in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion. Of the members, Didion
writes, “Some were American citizens and some never would be, but they were all Cuban first,
and they proceeded equally from a kind of collective spell, an occult enchantment, from that
febrile complex of resentments and revenges and idealizations and taboos which renders exile so
potent an organizing principal” (Miami 17).
The fact that these individuals “were all Cuban first” is a crucial point that applies to all
Cuban exiles in Miami. Even though they are living in an American city, and some are American
citizens, their Cuban heritage is what defines them and continues to keep them under what
Didion calls a “collective spell” that then shapes the city of Miami. Didion again develops and
solidifies her ideas on the page through her advancing diction. She goes from a “collective spell”
to an “occult enchantment” to “that febrile complex.” This final phrase uses the demonstrative
pronoun “that,” assuming an intimate understanding between her and her reader. In this last part
of the sentence, “…that febrile complex of resentments and revenges and idealizations and
taboos,” Didion’s cadence picks up as her voice edges into the conspiratorial form that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
34

Felton, 8.

	  

	  

43	  

dominates so much of Miami. Her diction and lack of punctuation work on two levels: on one
level, they show that she believes her reader is with her, understanding what she is thinking; on
another level, her syntax speaks to the feverishness of the Cubans she is describing and the
antagonism that absorbs them. Didion is illuminating the tension that continues to exist among
Cubans in Miami, whose resentment toward Cuba and the United States has left them to seek
vengeance for their lost identity.
Didion finds that even though there are plenty of non-Cubans in Miami, the whole place
is dominated by Cuban identity. She says, “The entire tone of the city, the way people looked
and talked and met one another, was Cuban. The very image the city had begun presenting of
itself, what was then its newfound glamour, its “hotness” (hot colors, hot vice, shady dealings
under palm trees), was that of prerevolutionary Havana, as perceived by Americans” (52). The
entire “tone” of Miami is Cuban, and to Didion that is something involving “glamour” and
“hotness.” The image of Miami is that of “prerevolutionary Havana,” but a “prerevolutionary
Havana,” Didion notes, “as perceived by Americans,” as though to say it is not authentically
Havana-like at all. Didion goes on to say, “This was not, in other words, an invisible 56 percent
of the population” (Miami 53).
The very Cuban “tone” of Miami is all the evidence needed to show that these people are
an active and influential part of the population of the city. With her explication (“this was not, in
other words…”) and use of the population percentage, Didion appears to be mocking someone,
perhaps whoever believes the Cuban population to be “invisible.” Though she does not explicitly
state who this is, it can be inferred that she means to mock the Miami Anglos, as she says prior to
this passage,

	  

	  

44	  

This set of mind, in which the local Cuban community was seen as a civic challenge
determinedly met, was not uncommon among Anglos to whom I talked in Miami, many
of whom persisted in the related illusions that the city was small, manageable, prosperous
in a predictable broad-based way, southern in a progressive sunbelt way, American, and
belonged to them (Miami 51).
Didion not only shapes Miami for her reader by describing the vast Cuban influence, she also
uses the image of this influence to prove wrong the Miami Anglos with whom she has spoken.
She appears to look down upon the Miami Anglos for their ignorance, and implies with her
illustration of Cuban culture that the city does not belong to the Miami Anglos, even though they
continue to carry on with their “illusions” that it does.
Not only do Miami Anglos refuse to acknowledge the influence of the Cubans, Didion
explains that they also have a perpetually haughty attitude towards Cuban culture in general. She
says, “There was in any such view of Miami Cubans an extraordinary element of
condescension…shared by Miami Anglos, who were inclined to reduce the particular liveliness
and sophistication of Cuban life to a matter of shrines on the lawn and love potions in the
botánicas, the primitive exotica of the tourist’s Caribbean” (Miami 61). The snobbery present in
Miami Anglos’ views of Miami Cubans is apparent in their inability to see that the Cuban culture
that surrounds them is worldly and energetic. They “reduce” the culture to these ornaments that
are in no way emblematic of authentic Cuban culture; they are, rather, the “primitive exotica of
the tourist’s Caribbean.” This is a powerful distinction, as the Miami Anglos are by no means
tourists in this culture. Though it may not be their own culture in terms of race, it is the culture
that is dominant in the city they live in, and yet they refuse to see it for what it really is.

	  

	  

45	  

Further exploring this cultural tension, Didion examines the Miami Cubans’ feelings
towards the United States government. She writes,
Here between the mangrove swamp and the barrier reef was an American city largely
populated by people who believed that the United States had walked away before, had
betrayed them at the Bay of Pigs and later, with consequences we have seen. Here
between the swamp and the reef was an American city populated by people who also
believed that the United States would betray them again…betray them at all the
barricades of a phantom war they had once again taken not as the projection of another
Washington abstraction but as their own struggle, la lucha, la causa, with consequences
we have not yet seen (Miami 80).
It is important for Didion to situate the Miami Cubans and their ideas in the place where they are.
She notes that these ideas exist here, “between the mangrove swamp and the barrier reef” to
show the expanse of the area in which these views exist. Miami is a large city, an “American
city,” dominated by a population that feels betrayed by the U.S. government. Didion’s repetition
is almost menacing as she works to solidify this notion that people so distrustful of the American
government dominate an entire city in America. She assumes that her reader is aware of what she
means when she mentions the “consequences we have seen” as the result of the U.S. betraying
the Cubans at the Bay of Pigs. Though she does not state it, it seems that these “consequences”
are the Cuban retaliation. She makes an important distinction about the betrayal the Cubans feel;
they did not take the “phantom war,” The Bay of Pigs, as “another Washington abstraction.”
They took it as “their own struggle, la lucha, la causa” against Castro, and they were abandoned
by the United States. Didion’s tone again implies a looming menace when she warns against the
“consequences we have not yet seen.”

	  

	  

46	  

In “Didion’s Political Tropics: Miami and the Basis for Community,” Sandra K.
Hinchman speaks about the “underwater narrative” Didion finds in Miami. Hinchman says, “The
only public narrative that Didion detects here is an ‘underwater narrative’ of intrigue and
deception, spawned when the desperate hopes of exiles meet the extraconstitutional ambitions of
government officials.”35 Didion is perpetually interested in subtext and finds that Miami is full of
it. She finds the “intrigue and deception” primarily in bureaucratic, rehearsed language, in which
people never say what they mean and words are used as both protective shields and ammunition.
Didion recalls that the first time she went to Miami, she was repeatedly told where she
should not go and what she should not do. This recalls Salvador, when Didion’s Salvadoran
employee tells her what to avoid there, and here Didion again ignores what she is told. She says,
“In the end I went without incident to all of the places I had been told not to go, and did not or
did do most of the things I had been told to do or not to do, but the subtext of what I had been
told, that this was a city in which black people and white people viewed each other with some
discontent, stayed with me…” (Miami 39). Didion does not abide by the safety guidelines given
to her, but keeps in mind the “subtext,” of these guidelines, the issues of race that are not directly
spoken to her but implied in where “not to go” and what “not to do.” However, this calls into
question something Didion does not address, that is, how does keeping this subtext in mind
affect what she is doing when she goes to these places and does these things she is told not to?
Surely keeping this subtext in mind affects her perception of these places and her actions when
she is in them. While withholding information often benefits Didion’s writing, here it mystifies
what is going on to no purpose.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
35

Sandra K. Hinchman, “Didion’s Political Tropics: Miami and the Basis for Community,” The Critical Response to
Joan Didion, ed. Sharon Felton (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994) 237.

	  

	  

47	  

Didion is skeptical throughout much of Miami, putting forth suspicions about Kennedy’s
assassination and the Iran-Contra affair, but this underwater narrative she deals with is most
effectively uncovered when she looks at language. Didion examines the relationship between
false language and reality in Salvador, but in Miami, she looks at it with an even more skeptical
and critical eye. In Miami, Didion is particularly interested in “Washington Language”—the
flighty words and phrases used by United States bureaucrats to deny or to deter. She says,
“Track two” and “autonomous operations” were of course Washington phrases, phrases
from the special vocabulary of Special Groups and Standing Groups and “guidelines” and
“approaches,” words from a language in which deniability was built into the grammar,
and as such may or may not have had a different meaning, or any meaning, in 1963 in
Miami where deniability had become in many ways the very opposite of the point (Miami
94).
Playing on the name of “Special Groups,” Didion derides these Washington phrases, saying they
are part of a “special vocabulary.” Calling out phrases like “track two” and words like
“guidelines,” Didion is breaking this Washington code and revealing the problems of the United
States government that is forever maintaining plausible deniability. Didion says, in an almost
playful way, that these code words and phrases “may or may not have had a different meaning,
or any meaning” at this time in Miami, illuminating how unproductive this language of
deflection was at a time when the real “point” was to be transparent.
Didion refers to all of President Reagan’s public speeches, told in front of groups or on
the radio, as “stories,” told always for specific, pointed reasons. What troubles Didion the most
about these “stories” is the language used in them. She says, “The language in which the stories
were told was not that of political argument but of advertising (‘New intelligence shows…’ and

	  

	  

48	  

‘Now it has been learned…’) of the sales pitch” (Miami 159). Referring to Reagan’s speeches as
“stories” speaks volumes. To Didion, these are not speeches or arguments in any way, they are
simply tales told in a fantasy language where nothing is actually as it is spoken of. She notes that
the language of these stories is that of “advertising,” implying a dodgy, superficial way of
speaking. The phrases she quotes from Reagan are overly optimistic and all about selling
something, instead of being in the language of “political argument.”
Didion recalls a conversation she had with Reagan’s Director of Communications, David
Gergen, in which she notices this type of language again. She says, “I recall talking about the
administration’s Central American policy…and being struck not exactly by what he said but by
the way in which he said it…The terms David Gergen used that afternoon were exclusively those
of presentation” (Miami 178). Gergen’s language of “presentation” is like Reagan’s language of
advertising; the word “presentation” implies something rehearsed and somewhat artificial.
Didion goes on to talk about the subtext of David Gergen’s language, saying,
[He] had worked in the White House during three administrations, and acquired during
the course of them an entire vocabulary of attributable nods and acquiescent silences, a
diction that tended to evaporate like smoke, but the subtext of what he was
saying…seemed clear, and to suggest a view of the government of the United States…not
substantively different from the view of the government of the United States held by
those Cubans to whom I later talked in Miami: the government of the United States was
in this view one for which other parts of the world, in this instance Central America,
existed only as “issues” (Miami 179).
Didion speaks of David Gergen’s language as though it is something he has been trained in,
having “acquired” it during his years in the White House. Didion lets her feelings show here, as

	  

	  

49	  

her tone is especially sardonic when she says he has an “entire vocabulary” of agreeable nods
and silences. This also speaks to how little words mean to the people of the U.S. government;
Gergen’s vocabulary contains meek gestures of agreement to protect him from having to deal
with actually speaking about the government’s Central American policy. Didion says it is “a
diction that tended to evaporate like smoke,” strongly illustrating the transient nature of his
language. What is perhaps most interesting is Didion’s claim that in the subtext of Gergen’s
language lies an opinion of the U.S. government not unlike the one held by the Miami Cubans.
Didion seems to be saying that she can read in Gergen’s language that he, like the Miami
Cubans, knows that the U.S. views Central America as an “issue” to be fixed and nothing more.
This calls back to the realization Didion has about the American perception in El Salvador.
As seen earlier in Miami, Didion is deeply interested in these “consequences,” that are the
result of the United States government’s continuous betrayal of the Cuban exiles. Didion is able
to argue her own feelings about this through her exploration of language. She talks about the
“…distance between what is said in the high ether of Washington, which is about the making of
those gestures and the sending of those messages and the drafting of those positions that will
serve to maintain that imaginary world” (Miami 159). She goes on, “In many ways Miami
remains our most graphic lesson in consequences. ‘I can assure you that this flag will be returned
to this brigade in a free Havana,’ John F. Kennedy said at the Orange Bowl in 1962…meaning it
as an abstraction, the rhetorical expression of a collective wish; a kind of poetry, which of course
makes nothing happen (Miami 160).
Didion ironically uses this allusion to W. H. Auden’s line, “For poetry makes nothing
happen,”36 to berate Kennedy for his words at the Orange Bowl. To Didion, Kennedy’s speech is
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
36

W. H. Auden, “In Memory of W.B. Yeats.” Poets.org. Academy of American Poets, 1997. Accessed Jan. 2014.

	  

	  

50	  

nothing more than “a kind of poetry” that reflects a broad, hopeful idea that is never actually put
into action. She calls it a “rhetorical expression of a collective wish,” again harking back to the
idea that this type of language is used for optimistic presentation in order to appease people (in
this case, the Miami Cubans). Didion does not explicitly say what the “consequences” of this are,
but one can assume the greatest consequence of this “poetry” that “makes nothing happen” is
that this “imaginary world” is maintained. However, Didion is careful to point out that this
fantasy language does not dupe the Cuban exiles; it just further grounds them in their belief that
the government will keep trying to use and deceive them.
One must consider though, does Didion’s language make anything happen? Indeed, it
appears to do more than the United States government’s language, as Didion’s language is not
about selling an illusion, and it does not perpetuate an imaginary world. However, in can be
argued that in Miami, as in Salvador, Didion does not put forth any solutions to the problems she
points to. At the same time, what she is doing is crucial if any change is to eventually come
about; her attention to detail takes the first step by bringing reality to the forefront.
For Didion, the underwater narrative in Miami is something unexplored by many, and is
found most prominently in what she calls “Miami stories.” She talks briefly about Steven Carr
and Jesus Garcia, two exiles who were employed by the CIA and allegedly shipped guns to
Central American rebels. She presents the information about both men in terms of their own
personal accounts, which she points out, are full of inconsistencies but also share many strange
connections. However, Didion writes, “There were no particularly novel elements” in the stories
told by either man. “They were Miami stories, fragments of the underwater narrative, and as such
they were of a genre familiar in this country since at least the Bay of Pigs. Any single Miami
story…was hard to follow, and typically required a more extensive recall of other Miami stories

	  

	  

51	  

than most people outside Miami could offer” (Miami 202). Didion’s voice is conspiratorial as
ever. She does not fully identify what a “Miami story” is, precisely because one cannot. The
“Miami stories” are “fragments of the underwater narrative,” meaning, however vaguely, that
they are full of inconsistencies and mystery, but have a striking subtext and subtle connections.
A single “Miami story” often needs to be backed up by a “recall” of other ones, which is
something “most people outside Miami,” meaning those in Washington, cannot do. This notion
illustrates the problematic relationship between the Cubans and the U.S. government. And, as
much as Didion tries (as with Carr and Garcia), it is difficult to confirm the validity of these
stories; because of this, Didion realizes, people do not see any value in studying the “underwater
narrative.” She says,
Particularly in Washington, where the logical consequences of any administration’s
imperial yearnings were thought to be voided when the voting levels were next pulled,
the study of the underwater narrative, these stories about what people in Miami may or
may not have done on the basis of what people in Washington had or had not said, was
believed to serve no useful purpose (Miami 203).
Didion does not ascribe the faults in the government’s approaches towards Miami and the Cuban
exiles to just one president. It is the case of “any administration,” she says, boldly arguing that
once a president’s term is up, all of the “consequences” of his administration’s “imperial
yearnings,” or the poetry that makes nothing happen, become irrelevant. It is clear that Didion
believes the underwater narrative needs to be studied, specifically by those in Washington,
because the “consequences” can no longer be ignored.
The underwater narrative of Miami is hard to find; it is largely made up of rumors and
these “Miami stories,” that often cannot be confirmed. But Didion is attracted to them, much like

	  

	  

52	  

the “shimmering images,” because they are so commonplace, and yet it is hard to find meaning
in them. However, while Didion does not want to look too much into the “shimmering images,”
that call to her in The White Album, in Miami, she is compelled to look closely at all conspiracy
theories—perhaps because everyone else refuses to.
Didion quotes a New York Times article from 1975, in which Anthony Lewis writes,
“‘The search for conspiracy…only increases the elements of morbidity and paranoia and fantasy
in this country. It romanticizes crimes that are terrible because of their lack of purpose. It
obscures our necessary understanding, all of us, that in this life there is often tragedy without
reason’” (Miami 203). Didion uses this quote ironically, because she believes “the search for
conspiracy,” is actually important, and that ignoring them is what actually “romanticizes,” and
“obscures our understanding.” This is somewhat problematic, as conspiracies are not proven fact,
but Didion is also careful not to present them as such. She goes on to say,
That the assassination of John F. Kennedy might or might not have been the specific
consequence of his administration’s own incursions into the tropic of morbidity and
paranoia and fantasy (as early as 1964, two staff attorneys for the Warren Commission,
W. David Slawson and William Coleman, had prepared a memorandum urging the
commission to investigate the possibility that Lee Harvey Oswald had been acting for, or
had been set up by, anti-Castro Cuban exiles) did not recommend, in this view, a closer
study of the tropic (Miami 203).
Didion does not claim that Kennedy’s assassination was absolutely the “consequence” of the
U.S. government’s betrayal of the Cuban exiles, but rather, it “might or might not have been.”
She is entertaining the idea, not purporting fact. She uses Lewis’ phrase, “the tropic of morbidity
and paranoia and fantasy” to imply that these elements were actually the result of the

	  

	  

53	  

government’s lack of transparency and enabling of false hope, beginning with the Bay of Pigs.
But the government does not consider the “consequences,” the connections, the cause and effect.
“A closer study of the tropic,” of its own perpetuation of fantasy, is of no interest to the U.S.
government.
Didion does not necessarily believe all of these conspiracy theories, these “Miami
Stories.” Rather, she sees their growing prevalence as a sign of the ceaseless tension in Miami, a
tension that is the result of the Cuban exiles’ resentment, coupled with the U.S. government’s
total lack of transparency and inability to follow through on any promise. That there is no
interest in studying the “underwater narrative,” tells Didion what she fears the most: this will
only continue, and these “consequences” that she is so terrified of will only grow worse.

	  

	  

54	  

CHAPTER III: Political Fictions

A Book of Common Prayer

A Book of Common Prayer was published in 1977, six years before Salvador and ten
before Miami. Though it is a work of fiction, the theme of political and social unrest, and the
way Didion channels it through her narrator's voice, aligns it directly with Salvador and Miami.
A Book of Common Prayer, its title borrowed from the Anglican Church prayer books, takes
place in the fictional Latin American country of Boca Grande, full of corrupt government agents
and revolutionaries.37 Grace Strasser-Mendana, the widow of a wealthy Boca Grande planter, is a
retired scientist who is dying of cancer. Grace is the narrator, and takes it upon herself to be the
“witness” to a woman named Charlotte Douglas. Charlotte is an idealist, upper-middle class
Californian who flees to Boca Grande after her revolutionist daughter, Marin, bombs the
Transamerica building. Both Grace and Charlotte are American women living in Central
America, and although each has a different footing in the country, both are situated as outsiders.
In Didion’s depiction of Boca Grande and the people who live there, there comes through a
perhaps bolder voice than exists in her nonfiction. While she still relies heavily on implication,
she seems less restricted with voice in this fictional world and through this fictional gaze.
After her husband’s death, Grace is left in charge of their estate, and remains a member
of an extended family of wealthy and corrupt government officials. Because Grace is part of this
family, she is never treated as “la norteamericana,” the primary name used by the people of
Boca Grande to condescendingly describe Charlotte. And yet, in Grace’s profound interest in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
37

All citations from A Book Of Common Prayer are to: Joan Didion, A Book Of Common Prayer, (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1977).

	  

	  

55	  

Charlotte and her feelings towards Boca Grande in general, it becomes clear that she sees herself
as an outsider and as “la norteamericana” as well.
As we have seen before, Didion often relies on nicknames and epithets as metonymic
identifiers for people, leaving them as implications of larger problems for her reader to sift out.
Grace says, “When Charlotte first came to Boca Grande she was referred to always as la
norteamericana. La norteamericana had been heard typing in her room at the Caribe all night, la
norteamericana had woken a doctor at two in the morning to ask the symptoms of infant
framboesia. La norteamericana had advised the manager of the Caribe that he was derelict in
allowing the maids to fill the water carafes from the tap….” (BCP 24).
Didion uses repetition to affirm and reaffirm the nature of gossip in Boca Grande and
show how prevalent it is. The situations in which Grace is referred to by this name are also
pointed; people speak of Charlotte as “la norteamericana” when criticizing her for her loud
typing, for waking a doctor to ask about something seemingly irrelevant, and for complaining
about the way the maids handle the hotel water. Didion chooses these situations for a reason, to
make a point about the relations between North and Central Americans. The people of Boca
Grande criticize Charlotte’s white, upper class American behavior, and refer to her by this
condescending name as if to say this is the behavior of all North Americans, and all that
Charlotte can be defined by.
There is one occurrence wherein Grace is referred to as norteamericana, but it is only in
reference to Charlotte. Grace’s brother-in-law Victor says to her, “‘as another norteamericana
you could meet her’” (BCP 33). This is the first and only time Grace is referred to by this name
that is used so liberally with someone who is from the same place as she is. The line reads almost
jarringly, because we have been conditioned to only associate it with Charlotte. It serves as a

	  

	  

56	  

marker for the reader to recognize that Grace is both inside and outside. Grace’s nurse is the only
person, other than herself, who actually refers to her as an outsider. Grace says, “When I
interrupt her accounts of local miracles on the third telling she consoles herself by dismissing me
as ‘de afuera,’ an outsider. I am de afuera. I have been de afuera all my life” (BCP 56). The
nurse’s name for Grace, “de afuera” has a different connotation than norteamericana; she is one
of them, and yet she is still an outsider. Grace believes she is an outsider, as she confirms the
nurses’ title, but an outsider is something she feels she has been “all [her] life,” not just in Boca
Grande. Even though Grace is the narrator, A Book of Common Prayer is largely about Charlotte,
and Didion gives us much more of her backstory than she does of Grace’s. Because of this, it is
hard to really discern how Grace has been an outsider all of her life. This interaction between
Grace and her nurse also speaks to cultural and class tensions in Boca Grande. It is when Grace
does not let the nurse speak about local miracles that she “dismiss[es]” her as “de afuera.” This
implies that the nurse believes there is, among the native of Boca Grande, a collective interest in
things like local miracles.
When Grace first introduces Charlotte at the start of the novel she says, “Charlotte would
call her story one of passion. I believe I would call it one of delusion” (BCP 1). Later on Grace
says,
As a child of the western United States [Charlotte] had been provided…with faith in the
value of certain frontiers on which her family had lived, in the virtues of cleared and
irrigated land, of high-yield crops, of thrift, of industry and the judicial system, of
progress and education, and in the generally upward spiral of history. She was a
norteamericana” (BCP 60).

	  

	  

57	  

Here we see the difference between Grace’s de afuera nature and Charlotte’s norteamericana
nature. As Grace sees her, Charlotte believes in the “generally upward spiral of history;” she
believes in commerce and industry and progress and laws and regulations, and is hopeful that
they can exist everywhere, even in Boca Grande. Charlotte’s attitude seems to echo the rhetoric
of the United States government in places like El Salvador and Miami, about whose motives
Didion appears to be skeptical in her nonfiction. While Grace recognizes that she is an outsider,
Charlotte is too deluded with her hopeful ideals to realize that she is one too. Grace is realistic;
she knows there is no place for these hopeful and progressive Western conventions in Boca
Grande. In this, we see some of the realist and skeptical attitudes expressed (or rather, implied)
by Didion in her nonfiction.
Charlotte writes “Letters from Central America,” which Grace notes, she “tried
unsuccessfully to sell to The New Yorker” (BCP 13). Charlotte writes these letters in the hope
that they will illuminate positive things about the country, but they actually end up reinforcing
her norteamericana nature and how clueless she is about the place. Charlotte’s letters about Boca
Grande are all based in fantasy; she sees it as a place with color, character, and economic
promise, and Grace discredits these even more boldly than Didion herself might in a work of
nonfiction. She says, “[Charlotte] characterized Boca Grande as a ‘land of contrasts.’” Grace
then counters,
Boca Grande is not a land of contrasts. On the contrary Boca Grande is relentlessly “the
same”: The cathedral is not Spanish Colonial but corrugated aluminum. There is a local
currency but the American dollar is legal tender. The politics of the country at first appear
to offer contrast, involving as they do the “colorful” Latin juxtaposition of guerrilleros

	  

	  

58	  

and colonels, but when the tanks are put away and the airport reopens nothing has
actually changed in Boca Grande (BCP 13).
Charlotte’s depiction of Boca Grande is all her own illusion; Boca Grande is not a place with the
cultural flair and hopeful prosperity that she erroneously believes it is. Grace calls it “relentlessly
‘the same’” and the examples she gives seem to imply that being “the same” means being stuck
in profound, stagnating corruption. The only thing Grace can see one finding “contrast” in (and,
she says, “only at first”), is the politics of the place. The “‘colorful’ Latin juxtaposition” is one of
warfare—the guerrillas vs. the military—and even so, once “the tanks are put away and the
airport reopens” everything seems to go back to “normal.” In Grace’s voice we hear the Didion
we heard in Salvador; there is a fear that does not come through any particular words, but rather
the way she presents this information to us, particularly with her ironic tone. The idea that
warfare could be considered “colorful,” and the fact that the country quickly goes back to normal
after it, are fearful notions, and this quality is heightened by Grace’s choice to leave this
information to imply the larger issue here.
Charlotte plans to open a boutique in Boca Grande, another illusory concept. When she
shows the storefront to Grace, Charlotte wistfully comments, “‘the illusion of the tropics. That’s
the effect to strive for.’” To this, Grace counters to the reader, “As a matter of fact the illusion of
the tropics seemed to me an odd effect to strive for in a city rotting on the equator…” (BCP 219).
Charlotte’s use of the word “illusion” in this blissful manner is completely ironic given the state
of Boca Grande, and Grace mocks this American naïveté immediately. Direct commentary is
something Didion shies away from in her nonfiction, but in A Book of Common Prayer she
allows a fictitious person to do it readily. One must wonder if Didion is fearful that in this novel,
implication alone may not make the point that it does in her nonfiction. It is also worth noting

	  

	  

59	  

that A Book Of Common Prayer was written ten years before Miami, and this “illusion of the
tropics” is something Didion seems to have carried into that book as well, as she writes about the
Miami Anglos sharing that same idea about Cuban culture. The “illusion of the tropics” is the
fantasy of dreamers who refuse to see the reality of the political turmoil in these countries.
The undercurrent of violence and political unrest in Boca Grande is brought to life largely
through allusion and implication, recalling Didion’s voice in her nonfiction. For the greater part
of the novel, Grace’s voice remains as vague and suggestive as Didion’s in Salvador and Miami.
Grace says,
The guerrilleros here spend their time theorizing in the interior, and are covertly
encouraged to emerge from time to time as foils to the actual politics of the country. Our
notoriously frequent revolutions are made not by the guerrilleros but entirely by the
people we know. This is a hard point for the outsider of romantic sensibility to grasp
(BCP 29).
We are not told what type of “theorizing” the guerrilleros do, but perhaps the point is moot. The
real claim Grace is getting at here is that even though these guerrilleros have the revolutionary
ideas, they are not the ones who start the revolutions. Grace is acting coy when she says that they
are “covertly encouraged to emerge from time to time as foils” to the “actual politics” of Boca
Grande. She does not say who covertly encourages them, but her language and tone imply that
she knows. We also are not told what these “actual politics” are, but can only assume that they
are corrupt. Perhaps the most blatant use of vagueness and omission of knowledge is seen in
Grace’s claim that these revolutions are made “by the people we know.” This phrase implies a
conspiratorial, intimate understanding, and it also serves as an indication of Grace's insider
position. The people who start these false revolutions are not only the elite of Boca Grande, they

	  

	  

60	  

are also are the people closest to Grace. This is perhaps the reason why Grace takes an interest in
Charlotte, if only to feel closer to someone who is incorruptible.
At various points throughout the novel it becomes clear that Grace’s in-laws, who control
the politics of the country, have “connections” to the guerrilleros. Recording brunches and other
family gatherings, Grace reports brief but frequent mentions of revolutionaries’ names, but does
not examine her family’s connections to them any further. It is clear that Grace is holding back
from explicitly stating something about them. She evidently wants to remove herself from any
connection to the violence, and her insistence that she is an outsider is her way of doing this—
she claims no responsibility.
Grace equates the feeling just before a “transition,” or a false revolution, to the “harmonic
tremor” of a volcano nearing eruption:
Oil wells about to come in have a sound the attentive ear can detect.
As do earthquakes.
Volcanoes about to erupt transmit for days or weeks before their convulsion in a signal
called “the harmonic tremor.”
Similarly I know for months before the fact when there is about to be a “transition” in
Boca Grande… (BCP 193).
Didion structures many parts of A Book of Common Prayer and Democracy in this staccatoform. Peter S. Prescott, in “Didion’s Grace,” rightly notes that this form “allows for occasional
repetitions that lend a liturgical echo to her tale. Her exposition of situations and details adroitly
conceals their significance—until much later their meaning flares before our eyes.”38 That
Didion puts the word “transition” in quotes is also important and ironic; its as though Grace is
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
38

Peter S. Prescott, “Didion’s Grace,” The Critical Response to Joan Didion, ed. Sharon Felton (Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1994) 98.

	  

	  

61	  

analyzing a word used as metonymy by someone (perhaps the local government) to deflect from
the impending violence and what it really means. The greater irony is of course that Didion does
not have Grace explicitly state what the “transition” is, she lets the images of “earthquakes” and
“volcanoes” erupting tell us that Grace is speaking of one of these false “revolutions” after which
everything is the same.
Grace goes on to list the elements that let her know this “transition” is about to occur:
“There is the occasional tank on the Avenida Central. Sentries with carbines appear on the roof
of the presidential palace. For reasons I have never understood the postal rates begin to fluctuate
mysteriously” (BCP 193). These ominous images—the “occasional tank” and “carbines” on the
roof—recall those from Salvador. They are threatening images, made all the more threatening by
Grace’s presentation of them in this short, matter-of-fact manner. Grace describes the real
prelude to the violence as though it were a game, and in doing so, begins to narrow down what
the violence really is and who is involved. She says,
A game is underway, the “winner” being the player who lands his marker in the Ministry
of Defense, and the play has certain ritual moves: whoever wants the Ministry that year
must first get the guerrilleros into the game. The guerrilleros seem always to believe that
they are playing on their own, but they are actually a diversion, a disruptive element
placed on the board only to be “quelled” by “stronger leadership” (BCP 193).
This game metaphor, (which Didion also uses in Salvador), works perfectly to show how
government plays the guerrilleros, once again to create “a diversion” from what it is doing.
Grace suggests once more the existence of this language of euphemism and deflection,
presumably used by the government, with words like “quelled” and “stronger leadership.” This
language resembles the persuasive and corrupt “Washington Language” Didion speaks at length

	  

	  

62	  

about in Miami. Again, because of her familial ties we see why Grace is not explicitly
implicating the Boca Grande government here. One might then consider, is there a similar reason
(some fear of some repercussion) that causes Didion to shy away from directly calling out the
U.S. government’s involvement in violence in places like El Salvador and Miami? It is unlikely
that this is the case, but being able to detect a reason for Grace’s reliance on allusion and
implication, coupled with the fact that it is never clear just how much Didion knows, makes it
impossible to ignore this consideration of her.
Towards the end of the novel, Grace confronts her brother-in-law Victor about the way
the government takes advantage of the guerrilleros. Victor tells her that a “West Indian is
financing the guerrilleros,” which she says he had already told her. Grace asks Victor why he
does not arrest him, and Victor says, “You tell me…” Grace then says, “You don’t arrest him
because you want to know who’s financing him” (BCP 211). Victor does not respond to this and
Grace says to the reader,
There you had it. The guerrilleros would stage their “expropriations” and leave their
communiqués about the “People’s Revolution” and everyone would know who was
financing the guerrilleros but for a while no one would know for whose benefit the
guerrilleros were being financed. In the end the guerrilleros would all be shot and the
true players would be revealed.
Mirabile dictu.
People we know (BCP 211).
Here we have Grace at her most transparent, as she reveals the true nature of war in Boca
Grande—“there you had it” she declares, however cynically. She puts “expropriations” and
“People’s Revolution” in quotes, a familiar Didion mode, to reiterate the corruption of language

	  

	  

63	  

by the government and also by the revolutionaries, who have no power and cling to their
rhetoric. Grace’s own language is still slightly vague, especially with the term “true players,” but
by the last two lines it is clear what she is trying to impart. “Mirabile dictu” (“wonderful to
relate”) she says sarcastically, and then repeats this line she uses earlier—“People we know.”
The “true players,” the people perpetuating the violence and the corruption are not unknown
revolutionaries; in fact, they are the “people we know,” the people Grace knows. Again, in her
tone and cadence we get a sense of the real fear that Grace feels. There is also a sense of Grace
conceding, of her exhaustion from holding back the truth.
The culmination of Charlotte's presence as la norteamericana comes at the end of the
novel. Against the wishes of Grace and Charlotte’s ex husband Warren, Charlotte decides to stay
in Boca Grande during the coup d’état. Just before Charlotte is taken away and eventually killed,
she shows her passport at a sidewalk barricade and says, “‘Soy norteamericana…Soy una
turista.’” After this, Grace notes, “The passport was knocked from her hand by the butt of a
carbine” (BCP 267). This is the first time Charlotte ever admits to being a “norteamericana” and
“una turista,” and the passport being knocked from her hand by the butt of the gun seems to
perfectly conclude the reality of la norteamericana in Boca Grande. It is as though Didion is
trying to impart the harsh truth that with the conditions as they are in the country, there is no
hope for a norteamericana like Charlotte to ever survive.
In the wake of Charlotte’s death, the reader can glean one final distinction between Grace
and Charlotte’s positions in the country. The day after the funeral Grace reflects,
Today we are clearing some coastal groves by slash-and-burn and a pall of smoke hangs
over Boca Grande…You will notice my use of the colonial pronoun, the overseer’s ‘we.’

	  

	  

64	  

I mean it. I see now that I have no business in this place but I have been here too long to
change it (BCP 270).
Didion always appears to favor and commend realism over fantasy, and yet here she appears to
recognize a flaw: in realism comes pessimism and passivity. Grace has clarified for herself and
now us her position in Boca Grande—she is an “overseer,” a member of the ruling class and part
of the “we.” Grace is all too inside this world, and can no longer pretend to be an outsider; that
Charlotte's death signifies this change speaks to what a great effect being her “witness” has had
on Grace. It is clear when she says, “I have no business in this place” that Grace has disgust and
contempt for her position. However, she seems to believe that the amount of time she has spent
in Boca Grande inhibits any ability she may have to “change” things, even though she is well
aware of the problems in the country. While Charlotte is presented all along as naïvely optimistic
and unaware of the reality of the conditions in Boca Grande, she is the only one who actually
attempts to change things. Before she is killed, Charlotte gets a job in a doctor’s office, giving
inoculations during the cholera epidemic. Though her decision to stay in Boca Grande during the
coup ends in her death, she still makes an effort to improve the situation in the country. Didion
appears to put blame on the realist by having Grace remain ultimately passive, steadfast in her
belief that things will always be “the same,” and feeling unable to make any sort of change, even
if just for herself. Having the hopeful dreamer be the only one to take any sort of positive action
seems unlike Didion, but is also a logical concession to make, for a total lack of hope can make
nothing happen. Yet, it is important to note that this is one of the few times Didion seems
accepting of a positive quality in the dreamer. One must consider if Didion is perhaps critiquing
herself in this critique of Grace, in whose realism so much of Didion can be seen. This also

	  

	  

65	  

seems to partially explain Grace’s interest in Charlotte; in Charlotte, Grace sees something that
she herself cannot be.
Grace becomes even more transparent towards the end of the novel, specifically when she
reflects on Charlotte’s death. Grace admits, “The moment and circumstances of her arrest are
matters of record but the moment and circumstance of her death remain obscure. I do not even
know which side killed her…I know that fire from either an AT-15 or an AR-16 entered her
body just below the left shoulderblade but I also know that all sides had both weapons” (BCP
268). Although we have no way of knowing if Grace is telling the truth about what she claims to
not know, we are inclined to believe her, because of her confrontation with Victor and because
her language here seems to show that she is trying to give us as much information as she can.
That the details of Charlotte’s death remain “obscure,” even to someone who is for all intents
and purposes an insider, speaks to how impenetrable reality is in Boca Grande—Grace doesn’t
even know “which side killed her.”
Grace begins the novel saying, “I will be her witness,” referring to Charlotte. The last
lines of the novel are as follows:
The wind is up and I will die and rather soon and all I know empirically is I am told.
I am told, and so she said.
I heard later.
According to her passport. It was reported.
Apparently.
I have not been the witness I wanted to be (BCP 272).
Again we get this liturgical echo that Prescott speaks about, and here it works to emphasize
Grace’s act of giving up. She has lost faith in her ability to be Charlotte’s “witness,” for she

	  

	  

66	  

realizes that all she has is what she has been “told,” and what has been “reported...apparently.”
The issue of reliable narrator here is a truly Didion conflict; Grace clearly wants to be a reliable
narrator, but she cannot declare her story as definitive or truthful. Like Didion, Grace only
believes in empirical evidence and has to present things as she sees them, whether or not she
believes them to be factual. What she ends up with is something we will see again in
Democracy—a story of fragments and pieces from dispersed sources sewn together. The story
Grace tells about Charlotte ends up as a lot of hypotheses, and what ties it all together is less
Grace’s truthfulness, and more her interest in Charlotte. It is possible that this is why she
becomes more transparent at the end of the novel; she has realized she has not been a good
“witness,” be it to Charlotte or to anyone. Grace is not solely to blame for her inability to be a
better “witness.” Boca Grande, with its esoteric war that makes even the details of Charlotte’s
death indeterminable, denies her the power.
The title “A Book of Common Prayer,” seems to call to the bond between Grace and
Charlotte. Though she never directly addresses it, it is very likely that Grace sees a version of
herself that never materialized in Charlotte. Charlotte and Grace were both married to wealthy
men, and both have estranged relationships with their children. There is certainly empathy in
Grace’s interest in Charlotte, and a longing for the ability to be an outsider like her; this is what
drives Grace to spend her last days being Charlotte’s “witness.”
At the beginning of the novel, Grace (for the first and only time) gives us some of her
own background, about her scientific studies and her late husband. She then says, “I tell you
these things about myself only to legitimize my voice. We are uneasy about a story until we
know who is telling it. In no other sense does it matter who ‘I’ am: ‘the narrator’ plays no motive
role in this narrative, nor would I want to” (BCP 21). Didion often includes personal anecdotes in

	  

	  

67	  

her nonfiction, perhaps with this intention to “legitimize [her] voice.” Grace says the narrator
“plays no motive role,” and that it does not matter who the “I” is. This is simply untrue; if the “I”
did not matter, then Didion’s voice (albeit via Grace in this novel) would not be what it is. It is
true that Didion does not like to play a “motive role” in the narrative she is telling, but it is
unavoidable—her voice plays the motive role for her.
In “To El Salvador,” Lynn T. Hanley argues why it was necessary for Didion to write A
Book of Common Prayer before Salvador. She says,
[Didion’s] experience of war has been literary and imaginary, her inclination has been to
improve upon these accounts…To get at the facts…Didion had to penetrate both the
fictions about El Salvador and her own desire to disassociate, to fictionalize. With
[Salvador] Didion completes the passage she began in A Book of Common Prayer; she
crosses the line between la norteamericana and war to report from inside the war
zone…39
Didion does indeed penetrate the truth more than Grace, giving us a clearer look into “war zone,”
in Salvador than in A Book of Common Prayer. Perhaps this is, as Hanley suggests, because she
used the novel to get out all of her urges to invent and to distance herself before she actually
went to El Salvador. However, Didion’s “desire to disassociate” is certainly not absent from
Salvador, as it is never absent from her work. The inverse of Hanley’s argument is worth
considering: what would it mean for Didion’s fictional account of war, had she written the
nonfiction first? Would Grace be a better “witness”? Would Didion have even been compelled to
write this novel?

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
39

Lynn T. Hanley, “To El Salvador,” The Critical Response to Joan Didion, ed. Sharon Felton (Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1994) 181.

	  

	  

68	  

Democracy

Didion implicates herself, as a journalist named “Joan Didion,” in her 1984 novel
Democracy.40 Democracy, likely named after Henry Adams’ novel Democracy,41 takes place
primarily in Hawaii and Southeast Asia at the Vietnam War’s close. The novel follows Inez
Victor (neé Christian), wife of Democratic Senator Harry Victor, and girlfriend of CIA agent
Jack Lovett. The Christians are the quintessential upper class American family and resemble the
naïve Americans depicted in Salvador and Miami (as well as in Didion’s essay collections) who
insist on a golden dream and a forgotten past, and do not bother with consequences or reality. In
Democracy, as in A Book of Common Prayer, Didion brings her real-world observations about
the misuse of language to a fictional world. We once again see people in positions of power
using the language of advertising to obscure corrupt realities. Billy Dillon, Harry Victor’s aide, is
constantly molding situations, trying to come up with the best way to “spin” things. Similarly,
Jack Lovett tries to shroud the undertakings of the CIA in euphemisms. But, as Samuel Chase
Coale writes in “Joan Didion: Witnessing the Abyss,”
...Corruption confounds such disguise. Slowly, carefully Didion peels away the American
rhetoric and exposes the rot beneath…Democracy is exposed, at least in its American
guise, as riddled with corruption, international commerce, shadowy agencies…media
celebrity, the inherent apocalypse of the nuclear age, the thin layer of American belief in

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
40
41

All citations from Democracy are to: Joan Didion, Democracy, (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984).

Mary McCarthy, “Love and Death in the Pacific,” The New York Times Book Review (1984): 3, The New York
Times, 27 March 2014.

	  

	  

69	  

its own ‘innocence’ and ‘can-do’ faith. Didion applies her moral scalpel to such
hideously diseased flesh.42
In Democracy, as in A Book of Common Prayer, Didion relies on a first-person narrator that
bears striking resemblance to herself. However, in Democracy this resemblance is even more
pronounced, as the narrator is a very thinly fictionalized Joan Didion, bearing the author’s name
and history. “Call me the author,” the narrator instructs, “Let the reader be introduced to Joan
Didion” (Democracy 16). Didion is establishing a hybrid world, partly fictitious, and partly real.
This is a very modernist approach, a problematizing of narrative convention that has been seen in
works by Daniel Dafoe, Samuel Richardson, and Washington Irving.
In Democracy, “Joan Didion” lays out her relationships with the novel’s characters,
having met Inez Victor and Jacket Lovett when she and Inez were working at Vogue in 1960, a
time when Didion the author was indeed working there.43 In A Book of Common Prayer, Grace
gives some of her own background to “legitimize [her] voice” (BCP 21); though at the end of the
novel she feels she has failed at being a good witness. Didion’s choice to make the narrator in
Democracy even closer to her own self is perhaps a way of building a stronger trust; it makes the
fiction that much closer to nonfiction, that much closer to reality. However, she never claims to
be writing nonfiction. From the start she refers to what she is writing about Inez and her family
as a “novel,” referencing how “…Trollope might begin this novel” (Democracy 16) and saying
things like, “the setting is for another novel” (Democracy 20). By giving this fictional illusion of
nonfiction, and then stating that the work is a piece of fiction, Didion appears to be playing with
the concept of mimesis. Michael Davis, translator and commentator of Aristotle says, “Mimesis

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
42

Samuel Chase Coale, “Joan Didion: Witnessing the Abyss,” The Critical Response to Joan Didion, ed. Sharon
Felton (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994) 123.
43
National Book Award, “Interview: Joan Didion,” The Academy of Achievement, (Washington, D.C., 2006).

	  

	  

70	  

involves a framing of reality that announces that what is contained within the frame is not simply
real.”44
“Joan Didion” is extra attentive to establishing fact for the reader in Democracy. She will
say things like, “Let me establish Inez Victor” (Democracy 44) or “I am resisting narrative here”
(Democracy 133). This need to “resist narrative” is something that the narrator points out
frequently in the novel. Beyond proving her intimate relationships with the characters, what
makes “Joan Didion” the narrator so trustworthy is her apparent transparency about her conflicts
with narrative structure. The narrator in Democracy is not a scientist like Grace; she is a writer,
and by making visible her writing process, this idea of a work of fiction reading like nonfiction
becomes even sounder. Democracy begins with,
The light at dawn during those Pacific tests was something to see.
Something to behold.
Something that could almost make you think you saw God, he said.
He said to her.
Jack Lovett said to Inez Victor.
Inez Victor who was born Inez Christian (Democracy 11).
We have seen Didion revising on the page before; it often occurs when she is describing a
landscape or an image, in a method that resembles a lens zooming in, getting closer and closer to
the detail so that the image can be fully realized to the reader. What is presented here is a
different type of revision; in it we can see her struggle over narrative structure: “…he said”
becomes “He said to her” becomes “Jack Lovett said to Inez Victor.” In “An American
Education,” Thomas R. Edwards writes, “This self-revising fumbling with the identity cards that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
44

Pierre-Alexis Mevel, and Helen Tattam. Language and Its Contexts: Transposition and Transformation of
Meaning? (Bern: Peter Lang, 2010) 213.	  

	  

	  

71	  

novels are supposed to slip quietly under the door seems a little like having a magician confess
that the rabbit came not from the empty hat but from inside his vest.”45
The narrator also gives us glimpses at the different ways she could have written the
novel. One approach she considered was to start the novel with Inez saying in the first person,
“‘Imagine my mother dancing,’” and then later abandon the first person “in favor of the third”
(Democracy 21). “Joan Didion” gives nearly two full pages of detailed questions that could be
asked about the Christian family’s complex and suspect history. She concludes the list with
“These are all important questions down there, suggestive details in the setting, but the setting is
for another novel” (Democracy 20). What novel that would be is not made clear, but she seems
to imply that setting will not play a part in this one. “This is a hard story to tell” (Democracy 15)
the narrator says. She seems overwhelmed by the variety of directions she could go in, with the
number of “important questions” at her fingertips. In a work of nonfiction, this would be a
logical conflict: the problem of what should be weeded out from the bounty of history. But this is
still a work of fiction; she has created all of the questions and ideas that seem to overwhelm her.
Democracy is the perhaps the ultimate work that combines all of Didion’s concerns about
the politics and culture of the time she has written about, and it seems as though she is trying to
figure out the “right” way to capture the essence of these themes, both in fiction and nonfiction.
In doing this, “Joan Didion” lays everything out. She establishes exactly what she has chosen to
leave out—these important questions for a different novel, and lots of stories, for instance,
“stories that still dominate table talk down in that part of the world where Inez Victor was born
and to which she returned in 1975” (Democracy 19). Didion has always been inclusive, even
conspiratorial, with her reader, but this transparency about her writing in Democracy makes her
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
45

Thomas R. Edwards, “An American Education,” The Critical Response to Joan Didion, ed. Sharon Felton
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994) 190.

	  

	  

72	  

connection to the reader stronger than ever. She is not only addressing, but showing the inner
workings of this method of omission she has used for so long.
Images, or emblems, are as important to Didion in Democracy as they are in the rest of
her works. Early on in the novel, when “Joan Didion” is trying to figure out the way to begin her
story she says, “I have no unequivocal way of beginning it, although I do have certain things in
my mind” She continues with the first six lines of Wallace Stevens’ “Of Mere Being”46 and says
“Consider that” (Democracy 16). She then goes on,
I have: ‘Colors, moisture, heat, enough blue in the air’ Inez Victor’s fullest explanation of
why she stayed on in Kuala Lumpur. Consider that too. I have those pink dawns of which
Jack Lovett spoke. I have the dream, recurrent, in which my entire field of vision fills
with rainbow...Consider any of these things long enough and you will see that they tend
to deny the relevance not only of personality but of narrative, which makes them less than
ideal images with which to begin a novel, but we go with what we have (Democracy 17).
The Wallace Stevens lines and the colors and the dream and the “pink dawns” may mean nothing
or they may mean everything, as we have come to be aware of with Didion. These are images the
narrator has collected to write this story. She first tells the reader to “consider” them, but then
warns against the dangers of considering them for too long, for they could “deny the relevance
of…personality” and “narrative.” We see Didion confronting this issue in The White Album;
emblems, or shimmering images like these are impossible not to include because they are facets
of human nature (which Didion so aptly understands), but they are often unexplainable and thus
go against traditional narrative. They need to be looked at, but, as Didion says in “Why I Write,”

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
46

The palm at the end of the mind/Beyond the last thought, rises/In the bronze distance/A gold-feathered bird/Sings
in the palm, without human meaning/Without human feeling, a foreign song (Democracy 16).

	  

	  

73	  

“you can’t think too much about them.”47 If thought about for too long they may start to mean
too much, or conversely, they may start to mean nothing at all. Still, the narrator is compelled to
share these images as Didion is in The White Album. In these images we also see fragmented
pieces of story that Grace similarly deals with in A Book of Common Prayer.
Perhaps the most revealing Didion gets is when “Joan Didion” talks about teaching a
class at Berkeley on ideas of democracy in post-industrial writing. She says, “I spent my
classroom time pointing out similarities in style, and presumably in ideas of democracy (the
hypothesis being that the way a writer constructed a sentence reflected the way that writer
thought)” (Democracy 71). She points her students towards writers like Orwell, Hemingway,
Adams and Mailer, all of whom are suspicious of government and war, and acutely aware of how
language can be misused and misunderstood. “Consider the role of the writer in a post-industrial
society” she states next, either restating something she said to her class or speaking directly to
the reader, and then,
Consider the political implications of both the reliance on and the distrust of abstract
words, consider the social organization implicit in the use of the autobiographical third
person.
Consider, too, Didion’s own involvement in the setting: an atmosphere results. How?
(Democracy 72).
This final line comes from a textbook assignment the narrator comes upon earlier in the novel.
Again Didion is guiding our reading, telling us what we must “consider.” What she is presenting
here is fascinating—these are of course the questions at the foundation of this entire project. She
presents these questions, and directly involves herself in the consideration of them, seventy-two
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
47

	  	  

Joan Didion, "Why I Write," New York Times Book Review (Dec. 1976): 7

	  

	  

74	  

pages into a novel where all of this is currently going on. Didion is not coddling her reader, for
we already know well that she assumes a certain understanding of her audience; instead she
seems to be rewarding her reader with this great transparency. These lines almost seem like a
nod and a wink on Didion’s part.
The narrator goes on to say that when she was a student at Berkeley (where Didion the
author did indeed attend) she had “considered the same questions or ones like them” (Democracy
72).48 She moves on to talk about her newspaper reading as a student, saying she only cared
about news from Southeast Asia, and only about “the details.” This piece of information is what
brings her back to the world of Inez and her family, but she does not abandon her consideration
of the writer’s role. She says the only reason she knew that Inez’s father, Paul Christian, had
killed Hawaiian Congressman Wendell Omura was because it was “headlined
CONGRESSIONAL FOE OF VIET CONFLICT SHOT IN HONOLULU” (Democracy 74). Her
attention only to the details in her newspapers is indicative of her role as a writer, and although
she does not tell us to “consider” it, she includes it so that we can.
One detail the narrator brings up numerous times throughout the novel is a portion of
WNBC footage of a party on the St. Regis Roof, in which Inez is seen dancing with Harry Victor
and saying the word “marvelous” over and over, as in, “Marvelous day,” “You look marvelous,”
and “Marvelous to be here” (Democracy 42). The narrator says that this is the “context” in which
she always sees Inez Victor (Democracy 42). Inez, unhappy with political life and her marriage
dancing around and saying everything is “marvelous” is a testament to the falsities of that type of
public life. Didion is again puncturing myths about fantasy worlds. The narrator notes that this
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
48

	  

Linda Kuehl, "Joan Didion, The Art of Fiction No. 71," Paris Review, n.d. Web 15 Apr. 2014.

	  

	  

75	  

footage played repeatedly on the news, making it the main figure in the public’s perception of
Inez. Again Didion is trying to unveil these fabrications of the golden dream. The narrator later
says, “…Inez Victor had lost certain details” (Democracy 50). She refers to an Associated Press
interview in which Inez was asked “what she believed to be the ‘major cost’ of public life.’
‘Memory, mainly,’ Inez said.” (Democracy 51). Loss of memory is a familiar theme in Didion’s
work, particularly in Slouching Towards Bethlehem wherein Didion expresses her great concern
about people forgetting their pasts in order to chase the “golden dream.” Here she makes an
important point about the superficiality and lack of reality that comes with a “public life;”
everything is scripted and molded for Inez, and her only true reality—her memory—is a casualty
of that.
Billy Dillon, who controls nearly every aspect of Harry and Inez’s lives, illuminates the
way political figures use language for manipulative purposes. The Victors and the Christians face
numerous disgraces throughout the novel, and Billy has a spin for every one. During Harry’s
campaign, Billy describes Inez’s parents, who had a very uncivil marriage, as “parents in a
surprisingly contemporary marriage in which each granted the other freedom to pursue wideranging interests” (Democracy 155). When Paul Christian kills Wendell Omura and Inez’s sister
Janet, Billy writes Harry a speech that ends with, “This occasion of sadness for all Americans
could be an occasion of resolve as well…to overcome the division and differences tragically
brought to mind today by this incident in the distant Pacific” (Democracy 157). Billy takes a
corrupt situation and, through this language of persuasion, finds a way to make it about hope for
American progress. With Billy’s constant spinning of situations and the image of Inez dancing,
Didion shows concern for the way the media can be fed false information that subsequently
misinforms the public.

	  

	  

76	  

Timothy Parrish addresses this in his book From Civil War to the Apocalypse. He says
that Democracy shows “what drives history’s machinery in the postmodern age is not just power,
privilege and the need to maintain the status quo but also the collective loss of memory that
makes something that you see happen on television—whether live or replayed six hours later—
come to have the narrative weight that is traditionally associated with the word or form
history.”49 This is precisely what Didion is trying to showcase in this novel: her fear that history
is no longer based in truth. A clip of Inez saying “marvelous” and dancing with a husband she
does not love, or an appropriately worded statement manufactured by Billy Dillon are truly
dangerous in that they are fantasies masquerading as facts that eventually become the accepted
history. In Slouching, Didion shares her fears about this happening to the next generation in
Sacramento; she is supremely concerned that our acceptance of fantasy will distort the past for
people in the future.
In his review of Miami, which was published three years after Democracy, James Chace
notes the two works have a “familiar landscape” crafted by Didion’s “evocative prose.” He says
it is “a world of menace and elliptical connections, a world ‘where stories have tended to have
endings.’ It is a world peopled by antiheroes like Jack Lovett in…Democracy.”50 There is never
any explicit mention of Jacket Lovett being a CIA agent, but over the course of the novel it is
implied by fragmented details, like his presence in Saigon and Jakarta, and the mention of him
taking “unusual posts at unusual times” (Democracy 40). “Exactly what Jack Lovett did was
tacitly understood by most people who knew him, but not discussed,” the narrator says
(Democracy 40). At one point we get a glimpse at Jack in his own words,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
49

Timothy Parrish, From the Civil War to the Apocalypse: Postmodern History and American Fiction, (Amherst:
University of Massachusetts, 2008) 205.
50
James Chace, “Betrayals and Obsessions” The New York Times Book Review (1987): 3, The New York Times, 26
March 2014.

	  

	  

77	  

According to Jack Lovett himself he was someone who had “various irons in the fire.”
Someone who kept “the usual balls in the air.”
Someone who did “a little business here and there.”
Someone who did what he could (Democracy 39).
These quotes from Jack Lovett are almost humorous in their vagueness; he uses idiomatic
expressions to deflect from what he is actually doing for a living. We can feel in this passage’s
structure, particularly in the cadence, the “menace” and “elliptical connections” Chace speaks of.
The final line, “Someone who did what he could,” is not quoted, and seems like sarcasm from
the narrator, as though she is sardonically assuming the next thing Jack might say. This line also
strangely calls back to an earlier moment in the novel, when the narrator is talking about the
different emblems that the reader should consider; she says they aren’t ideal to start a novel with,
“but we go with what we have” (Democracy 17). Might this line and “Someone who did what he
could” be a sign of some sort of defeat, a rhetorical sigh from the narrator? It seems she is
saying, “this is the way things are, this is the reality we must go with.” There is again this sense
of the limited, fragmented materials that Grace is left with in A Book of Common Prayer.
On the very first page of Democracy, when “Joan Didion” is struggling with narrative
structure, she is relaying something Jack Lovett said to Inez—“The light at dawn during those
Pacific tests was something to see” (Democracy 11). By “Pacific tests,” Jack means the nuclear
bombs tested by the United States on small islands in the Pacific. Michael Tager, in “The
Political Vision of Joan Didion’s Democracy,” says,
The novel’s opening…establishes an arm of the government clandestinely exploding a
tremendously destructive weapon designed to enhance American security against unseen
communist adversaries. This distant activity…described with euphemisms, has profound

	  

	  

78	  

implications for the country’s fate. Lovett’s attitude of cool, amoral detachment reflects
an acceptance of the national security state and its premises…51
Tager is correct that there are serious implications when language is used to obscure an act as
severe as this, and that is what Didion, throughout so much of her work, seems to be conveying.
Jack manipulates language just as Billy does. Tager notes, “...[he] routinely says ‘assets’ when
he means money and airplanes, or ‘assistance effort’ when he means financing a foreign war.”52
But it is this “detachment” that Tager speaks of, this deniability when using words or phrases
that hide the truth behind the actions of the government, that is of greatest concern to Didion.
Critics who have written about Democracy see Jack Lovett as a sympathetic character,
and on the surface he is. Jack and Inez have a true literary romance—albeit unique, as he is a
CIA agent and she is married to a senator. Jack and Inez spend years apart but are always on
each other’s minds and always seem to find a way back to one another. Then there are other
sympathetic elements: Jack does what he does because of an “emotional solitude,” the narrator
says, and, “it would be inaccurate to call [him] disloyal,” and what he does is “never black or
white” (Democracy 219). Jack rescues Inez’s daughter. Jack drowns in a hotel swimming pool.
Didion certainly lays out the work for him to be a sympathetic character.
In her review of Democracy, Mary McCarthy argues, “That Inez Victor (and her creator)
clearly prefer a C.I.A. agent to a famous liberal senator may indicate a preference for action over
talk or just a distaste for United States hypocrisy.”53 Inez certainly prefers Jack to Harry, but the
issue to consider here is whether or not “her creator” (Didion) is doing what McCarthy says she
is. Certainly Didion prefers “action over talk,” and has “a distaste for United States hypocrisy,”
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
51

Michael Tager, “The Political Vision of Joan Didion’s Democracy,” The Critical Response to Joan Didion, ed.
Sharon Felton (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994) 202.
52
Tager, 209.
53
McCarthy, 3.

	  

	  

79	  

but is Jack Lovett not also part of that hypocrisy? Jack is all about deniability and obscuring
reality. And yet as much as Jack’s corruption has been exposed (through implication) throughout
Democracy, the narrator does also defend him to an extent, she does show a sympathetic side to
him. Is Didion trying to say that there are some people who take part in the corruption but who
are ultimately excusable? We return to the phrase “someone who did what he could”—Is this
Didion excusing Jack?
At the end of Democracy, Inez decides to move away from the political life to help
refugees in Southeast Asia, a move that bears resemblance to Charlotte Douglas giving
vaccinations in the doctor’s office in Boca Grande. Tager says, “[Inez’s] decision…responds to
the legacy of American intervention in Southeast Asia, which has helped to cause the refugee
problem…Her act implies that people who are willing to accept the past can make decisions that
promote some higher end, despite receiving no publicity.” This is perhaps one of the greatest
points Didion seems to be getting at throughout all of her work—we must accept our past in
order to make something better for ourselves in the future. As it stands now for Didion, our
ignorance and obliteration of our past is part of what keeps us living in fantasy. Tager says that
in the end Inez remains “…the novel’s truest democrat by trying to effect change at the local
level. Yet her isolated self-effacing action does not negate the more powerful anti-democratic
forces elaborated upon throughout the novel.”54
What seems strangely absent from Democracy is an element that runs rampant through
the rest of Didion’s political fiction and nonfiction—a sense of fear. Yes, there is the mention of
nuclear weapons, there is Wendell and Janet’s murder, and there are other ominous mentions of
the war, such as “one night in the spring of 1975 when the C-130s and the C-141s were already
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
54

Tager, 208.

	  

	  

80	  

shuttling between Honolulu and Anderson and Clark and Saigon…” (Democracy 14). But even
these incidents feel too impersonal, never intimately touched upon by the narrator or felt by
anyone in the novel. There is nothing that resembles the terror that Didion feels facing the men
with G-3s in the parking lot in Salvador, or the way Grace describes the impending coup in A
Book of Common Prayer. For a novel that deals with the Vietnam War, albeit at its end, it seems
surprising that any true image of terror is completely lacking. Didion says from the beginning
that setting is not going to play a part in this novel. Setting and place have been central to all of
her works on culture and politics, but Democracy is just about the facts; in this light it seems
more like nonfiction than any of Didion’s actual nonfiction. Without the sense of place we lose
the fear, we lose the intimate connection to the story.
In the last few pages of the novel, “Joan Didion” renounces the story she has written, just
like Grace does in A Book of Common Prayer. “Joan Didion” mentions again “Colors, moisture,
heat, enough blue in the air,” stating now that she got these words from Billy Dillon—they were
Inez’s answer to his question of why she was staying in Kuala Lumpur. The narrator continues,
Colors, moisture, heat.
Enough Blue air.
I told you the essence of that early on but not the context, which has been, you will note,
the way I tried to stay on the wire in this novel of fitful glimpses. It has not been the
novel I set out to write, nor am I exactly the person who set out to write it. Nor have I
experienced the rush of narrative inevitability that usually propels a novel toward its end,
the momentum that sets in as events overtake their shadows and the cards all fall in on
one another and the options decrease to zero.

	  

	  

81	  

Perhaps because nothing in this situation encourages the basic narrative assumption,
which is that the past is prologue to the present, the options remain open here.
Anything could happen (Democracy 232-233).
Democracy is the platform upon which Didion seems to be laying out all her of cards. Here is the
ultimate nod and wink: “you will note” that giving the “essence” but not “the context” has been
“the way I tried to stay on the wire.” Didion has unwavering confidence that her reader not only
understands what she means at all times, but also why she is telling the story this way. She is sure
that we have seen all along that she has been giving just the “essence” so that she can remain
detached. “Joan Didion” forfeits like Grace, admitting that this novel of “fitful glimpses” is not
what she indented to write. But, again because our narrator is a writer, she takes it further than
Grace does. She also concedes that she has not had “the rush of narrative inevitability
that…propels a novel towards its end,” she has not experienced the “momentum” that comes
when “events overtake their shadows.” But has Didion the author ever experienced this? Isn’t
this the narrative convention that she is so distrusts? It is indeed, which is why “Joan Didion”
concludes that the reason it is impossible to follow any narrative convention is because nothing
she is dealing with encourages the “basic narrative assumption” that “the past is prologue to the
present.” The past has never remained just the “prologue;” we see this throughout all of Didion’s
work. The past cannot just be the opening act; it must be carried throughout the entire play,
because acceptance of the past is what allows us to understand reality. Didion will not tell a
conventional story, and she shouldn’t. Narrative convention constricts and denies the reality of
the world Didion so closely analyzes in both her fiction and nonfiction. “Anything could
happen,” she says.

	  

	  

82	  

Conclusion

Didion’s novels Run River (1963) and Play It As It Lays (1970), and three of her
nonfiction works, After Henry (1992), Political Fictions (2001), and Where I Was From (2003),
could have also been examined in this project, though they embody the issue of her voice less
than the ones used here. The same is true of Didion’s two most recent autobiographical works,
which have won great critical acclaim. In 2005, Didion released The Year of Magical Thinking, a
reexamination of her grief in the year after her husband, John Gregory Dunne, died. 2011’s Blue
Nights is an equally candid reflection on the loss of her daughter, Quintana Roo. In both works,
Didion maintains her investigative eye, even citing reports from medical journals. Although
these are her most intimately personal works, Didion maintains her stance “on the wire,” rarely
getting explicitly emotional.
While Didion’s voice is her most distinctive feature, there is a noticeable lack of analysis
of it. Mark Z. Muggli writes,
Didion’s reviewers and readers have always been conscious of her detail, but what one
calls ‘vivid’ another calls ‘symbolic.’ Journalism textbooks cannot help define Didion’s
effects more precisely, since these textbooks emphasize the importance of detail without
distinguishing kinds of detail…At least for present, Didion’s rhetoric of fact is best
approached through the close analysis practiced by critics interpreting individual literary
texts.”55
I chose to begin this project with The White Album and Slouching Towards Bethlehem because
these collections show Didion observing her most intimate landscape, where her curiosities and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
55Muggli	  403	  

	  

	  

83	  

insecurities about what we think we know begin. In Salvador and Miami, Didion’s aggressive
excavation truly picks up traction, as she moves outside of her comfort zone. A Book of Common
Prayer and Democracy then show us what Didion makes of our world in her fiction.
In all of her work, Didion is an epistemologist. She is perpetually concerned with how we
perceive and interpret fact, and is always asking: how do we know what we know? Why do we
accept certain words and phrases when they obscure what could be fact? Why do we take our
culture’s presentation of itself at face value? This is why the study of language is so important to
Didion; she and her narrators scrutinize every word, because Didion herself is terrified of falsely
“knowing.” It is important to recognize that Didion does not claim to be an expert, nor does she
presume to have answers to all the questions she raises. We see her epistemic investigation of
herself in her confusion over what California means to her and in her inability to “find,” or
understand it, as well as in her concerns about only seeing “flash pictures,” and in her various
realizations about which “stories” call to her as a writer, and which do not.
Critics enjoy arguing that the constant presence of Didion’s “I” (whether explicitly on the
page or implicitly in her language and tone) makes for excessively self-absorbed writing. What
these critics seem to ignore is that Didion’s inclusion of the “I” is part of what Muggli calls her
“rhetoric of fact.” Even in the moments when she clearly uses the act of writing to work though
her own preoccupations with illusion and reality, her true objective is still to interrogate
everything she can. In writing about personal experiences, Didion is also able to present fact in a
more real and intimate way that goes against the manufactured and rehearsed facts that come
from the government and the media.

	  

	  

84	  

Didion addresses the issue of the “I” in “Why I Write,” in which she says the exercise of
writing in itself is “the act of saying I, of imposing oneself upon other people, of saying listen to
me, see it my way, change your mind.” She goes on to say,
It’s an aggressive, even a hostile act. You can disguise its qualifiers and tentative
subjunctives, with ellipses and evasions — with the whole manner of intimating rather
than claiming, of alluding rather than stating — but there’s no getting around the fact that
setting words on paper is the tactic of a secret bully, an invasion, an imposition of the
writer’s sensibility on the reader’s most private space.56
These “disguises” are of course Didion’s own; she relies on “intimating rather than claiming”
throughout all of her work, perhaps ultimately so that she does not force her own “sentiments”
upon her reader. Didion contends that these “disguises” mean nothing in the end because all
words put on a page serve as “an imposition” of the writer’s feelings on the reader. But is this not
what compels us to read in the first place? I think readers, especially those of us who read
Didion, enjoy having her voice invade our heads; it is what allows us to also start thinking about
the world in this critical and enquiring manner.
The examination of Didion’s writing on politics and culture in the context of her voice is
crucial not only to the study of American literature, but to the study of American society in
general. In The Art of Fact, Barbara Lounsberry writes,
[Didion] uses herself as both a probe and a model of American society. Her confessions
of personal illusions both encourage reader sympathy and identification with her views,
and demonstrate how prone Americans are to illusion. Her effort to discipline her
illusions likewise becomes a model for reader behavior. Most cleverly, her assertions that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
56

Joan Didion, "Why I Write," New York Times Book Review (Dec. 1976): 1.

	  

	  

85	  

she can find no meaning have the effect of spurring readers to moral understandings she
herself refuses overtly to claim.57
Even though Didion herself believes that writing is a way of imposing one’s “sensibility” on the
reader, I am skeptical of this first part of Lounsberry’s claim. It can certainly be argued from a
more distanced, theoretical approach that Didion’s inclusion of her own illusions forces the
reader to “[identify] with her views,” which ultimately shows how “prone Americans are to
illusion.” However, I do not believe that this is Didion’s actual intent, especially since she tries
so hard to not manipulate the reader by imparting her own “sensibility.” It seems rather, that
Didion’s use of herself as a “probe and a model of American society” is far simpler; she shares
her own personal illusions to show that even she, who is so critical of illusions, is susceptible to
them. Lounsberry is absolutely correct, though, when she says Didion sets up “a model for reader
behavior,” by observing and trying to correct her own illusions. It could be argued that this is an
ethical issue, but it also seems to be Didion’s way of opening our eyes and having us question
how things are presented to us.
Didion’s claim to “find no meaning” in certain things can be exasperating, but ultimately
it forces us as readers to search harder and to consider what we too can “find no meaning in,”
and why it happens. We can fault Didion for her decision to stay on the wire and for her lack of
transparency at times; it can even be argued that she verges on obscuring reality herself when she
remains so vague. But Didion is not interested in over-explaining; she is interested in how reality
is constructed in America and whether or not we can see through it.
Muggli writes, “We need…a clearer and more detailed analysis of how writers like
Didion incorporate the world into their texts. We need a greater appreciation for the sophisticated
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
57	  Lounsberry,	  136	  

	  

	  

	  

86	  

poetics of factual literature.”58 While Didion’s great devotion to detail (eg. her inventory taking,
her focus on names) is a large part of what brings “the world” into anything she writes, this is
problematized by her lack of exposition of the details, as well as her great trust in her reader. In
her review of Democracy, Mary McCarthy argues that Didion’s writing requires her readers to
“be knowing.” She says,
…the St. Regis Roof, the Dalton School, Grant Park in Chicago at the '68 convention…to
appreciate that detail, you have to know about Grant Park, and not everybody does. To be
knowing about the right names implies, moreover, being knowing about the wrong names
- Dow Chemical, Air Asia, Air America. That is very important too. The names of
airports can be spent like coin: Anderson, Clark, Travis, Johnston, besides the old pennyante ones like Tan Son Nhut. I am not sure where some of these airports are…But I know
that I ought to know. That is the special kind of insecurity - fear of not belonging to a
club - that Hemingway had a genius for producing in his readers...59
That Didion presents names like these without further explanation does imply that we should be
familiar with them, that we should be “in the know.” This tactic unfairly assumes a certain
intellectual or worldly awareness on the part of the reader (if the reader doesn’t have this
assumed knowledge, it has an excluding effect). Yet, this is also Didion’s way of presenting fact.
She wants us to read her work and feel that it is true to the world that we live in, even if it is a
work of fiction. In order to make the world she constructs feel authentic, her narrator needs to
seem part of that world. Otherwise, how can the narrator be trusted at all? It is this realist, New
Journalistic, nonfiction-influenced approach to fiction; it is Didion being obsessed with fact and
a viable presentation of reality, which marks her style. It does not seem that she is trying to make
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
58	  Muggli,	  57	  

59

McCarthy, 3	  

	  

	  

87	  

her reader feel“[insecure],” but rather that she desires to present things as they are. Of course, the
cost is that readers may believe she is snobbish or elitist, but it seems clear by now that Didion
has faith that her reader is aware of her methods and the reasons behind them.
Joan Didion has played an enormous part in reshaping American nonfiction and fiction. It
has now been forty-six years since Slouching Towards Bethlehem was released, and her voice is
still so distinctive. What distinguishes Didion from other New Journalists and from other
contemporary writers is her particular understanding of the weight of grammar. Her attention to
the arrangement of words, and to the construction of reason and meaning through one’s style, is
why Didion’s voice still demands to be studied.

	  

	  

88	  

Works Cited
Auden, W. H. "In Memory of W. B. Yeats." Poets.org. Academy of American Poets, 1997. Web.
22 Jan. 2014.
Blum, William. Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II. Monroe,
Me.: Common Courage, 1995. Print.
Carton, Evan. “Joan Didion’s Dreampolitics of the Self.” The Critical Response to Joan Didion.
Ed. Sharon Felton. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994. 33-37. Print.
Chace, James. “Betrayals and Obsessions.” The New York Times Book Review (1987): 3. Web.
26 March 2014.
Coale, Samuel Chase. “Joan Didion: Witnessing the Abyss.” The Critical Response to Joan
Didion. Ed. Sharon Felton. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994. 123. Print.
Didion, Joan. A Book of Common Prayer. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1977. Print.
———. Democracy. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984. Print.
———. Miami. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987. Print.
———. Salvador. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982. Print.
———. Slouching Towards Bethlehem. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1968. Print.
———. The White Album. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979. Print.
———. "Why I Write." New York Times Book Review 5 Dec. 1976. Print.
Ebert, Martina. Rev. of Salvador, by Joan Didion. Ohio Journal 8.3 Fall/Winter 1984-1985: 3132. Print.
Edwards, Thomas R. “An American Education.” The Critical Response to Joan Didion. Ed.
Sharon Felton. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994. 190. Print.
Eliot, T.S. "TS Eliot - Burnt Norton." Art of Europe. N.p., n.d. Web. 5 Mar. 2014.

	  

	  

89	  

Felton, Sharon. Introduction to The Critical Response to Joan Didion. Westport, CT:
Greenwood, 1994. 8. Print.
Grizzutti Harrison, Barbara. "Joan Didion: Only Disconnect." Center for Programs in
Contemporary Writing. University of Pennsylvania, n.d. Web. 23 Apr. 2014.
Haggarty, Richard A. "El Salvador: A Country Study." Federal Research Division. Library of
Congress. Nov. 1988. Web. 20 Jan. 2014.
Hentoff, Nat. “Behold the New Journalism—It’s Coming After You!” Evergreen Review 12
(1968): 50. Print.
Hinchman, Sandra K. “Didion’s Political Tropics: Miami and the Basis for Community.” The
Critical Response to Joan Didion. Ed. Sharon Felton. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
1994. 237. Print.
Kissinger, Jessie. "The California Room." The Paris Review 23 July 2013. Web. 23 Feb. 2014.
Klinkenborg, Verlyn. "Rereading the Landscape of an Essay by Joan Didion." The New York
Times 28 Jan. 2005. Web. 23 Feb. 2014.
Kuehl, Linda. "Joan Didion, The Art of Fiction No. 71." Paris Review, n.d. Web. 15 Apr. 2014.
Lounsberry, Barbara. The Art of Fact: Contemporary Artists of Nonfiction. New York:
Greenwood, 1990. 134-136. Print.
Lowell, Amy. Preface to Some Imagist Poets: An Anthology. Ed. Amy Lowell. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1915. Vi-Viii. Print.
Mevel, Pierre-Alexis, and Helen Tattam. Language and Its Contexts: Transposition and
Transformation of Meaning? Bern: Peter Lang, 2010. Print.
McCarthy, Mary. “Love and Death in the Pacific.” The New York Times Book Review (1984): 3.
Web. 27 March 2014.

	  

	  

90	  

Mills, Nicolaus. Introduction. The New Journalism: A Historical Anthology. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1974. Print.
Muggli, Mark Z. "The Poetics of Joan Didion's Journalism." American Literature 59.3 (1987):
402. Print.
National Book Award. “Interview: Joan Didion.” Telling Stories in Order to Live. By The
Academy of Achievement. Washington, D.C.: 2006. Print.
Parrish, Timothy. From the Civil War to the Apocalypse: Postmodern History and American
Fiction. Amherst: University of Massachusetts, 2008. Print.
PBS. "El Salvador: Civil War." PBS. PBS, n.d. Web. 31 Mar. 2014.
Prescott, Peter S. “Didion’s Grace.” The Critical Response to Joan Didion. Ed. Sharon Felton.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994. 98. Print.
Santayana, Geroge. “The Genteel Tradition in American Philosophy.” The American Intellectual
Tradition. Ed. David A. Hollinger and Charles Capper. New York: Oxford UP, 2011.
113. Print.
Staub, Michael E. “Black Panthers, New Journalism, and the Rewriting of the Sixties.”
Representations, No. 57 (1997): 55. Print.
Tucker, Spencer. Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1998. 1099. Print.
Tager, Michael. “The Political Vision of Joan Didion’s Democracy.” The Critical Response to
Joan Didion. Ed. Sharon Felton. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994. 202. Print.
Weber, Ronald. “New Journalism and Old Documentary” Rev. of The New Journalism by Tom
Wolfe. The Review of Politics, Vol. 36, No. 2 (1974): 306-308. Print.

	  

	  

91	  

Yeats, William Butler. "The Second Coming." Poetry Foundation. Poetry Foundation, n.d. Web.
21 Jan. 2014.

