Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2012

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2012

The Hideous Progeny of the Anti-Type: An
Exploration of Love, Isolation, and Pursuit in the
work of the Shelleys
Carley Gooley
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Gooley, Carley, "The Hideous Progeny of the Anti-Type: An Exploration of Love, Isolation, and Pursuit in the work of the Shelleys"
(2012). Senior Projects Spring 2012. Paper 173.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2012/173

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2012 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

The Hideous Progeny of the Anti-Type:
An Exploration of Love, Isolation, and Pursuit in the work of the Shelleys

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College
by
Carley Gooley

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2012

ii

Acknowledgements

I would first and foremost like to thank Lianne Habinek, not only for being my project advisor in
this insane time in my life, but also for sticking with me through six straight semesters. I’d also
like to think Cole Heinowitz for being the best advisor ever in all things academic and personal.
Erin Canann and David Shein for making sure I didn’t slip through the cracks, and Deirdre
d’Albertis for continuously making me smile whether she intended to or not.

I’d also like to give my most deepest gratitude to Rebecca Stacey, without whom this project
may have never seen the printer.

I’d like to acknowledge my own anti-types, Emily Handsman and Jen Biener, who regardless of
what this thesis argues, prove there is an ideal form of love.

And finally to my fellow seniors: now we all have our own hideous progenies. I hope we all go
forth and prosper.

iii

Table of Contents:

Acknowledgements…………………………………………………………………………..……ii
Table of Contents…………………………………………………………………………………iii
Introduction………………………………………………………………………………………..1
Chapter I – Double Double: Narcissistic Love and its Multitudes in “Alastor”…………………..6
A Need to Flesh out the Anti-Type
The Initial Dichotomy—The Two Poets
The Veiled Maid—The Prototype and the Anti-Type
Echoing Myth
A Cautionary Elegy
Chapter II – A Conversation of Introductions:
Comparing the Prefaces of the 1818 and 1831 Editions of Frankenstein………….33
Percy Shelley’s Preface to the 1818 edition
Mary Sheley’s Introduction to the 1831 edition
Chapter III – Frankenstein: The Anti Anti-Type Response to “Alastor”………………………..49
Walton, the First Mad Scientist
The Early Academic Obsession and Creation
Wandering Kindred Spirits
Creating Companionship and Chaos
The Final Chase
Works Cited………………………………………………………………………………..…….70
Bibliography……………………………………………………………………………………..72

1
Introduction:
“I have love in me the likes of which you can scarcely imagine and rage the likes of which you
would not believe.” –The Creature from Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein1

The Shelleys. That name alone conjures up a vast array of images representative of
perhaps the most famous family in the history of English literature. Percy Shelley was and
continues to be one of the faces of the Romantic movement, producing poetry that changed the
course of the written word. Mary Shelley came from a family of rich literary pedigree the
daughter of political writer and novelist William Godwin and one of the premiere voices of the
women’s rights movement, Mary Wollstonecraft. When considering the influence of Shelley and
Mary’s work combined the effect is immeasurable and they both produced works that continue to
stand the test of time.
But another thing comes to mind when considering the Shelleys besides their impressive
body of work—their personal lives, fraught with love, scandal, and misfortune. The young Percy
Shelley met Mary through her father, whose political views Shelley idolized. The was a problem,
though, in that he was already married to his then nineteen year old, Harriet, pregnant with his
first child. But Shelley was smitten with the precocious Mary Godwin and they ran away
together, bringing along Mary’s stepsister Claire Clairmont. As one can imagine, a relationship
begun in such a state of passion is primed to become saturated with drama. And so it was.
Although Shelley had declared his love for Mary, there was also much speculation that he
was also involved romantically with Claire. Mary may have won over Shelley’s affections so
1

Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. Dir. Kenneth Branagh. Perf. Robert De Niro, Kenneth Branagh,
Helena Bonham Carter. TriStar Pictures, 1994. Dvd.

2
that he would leave his wife, but she was not altogether at peace with his possible sexual
deviancy. This manifests quite clearly in a letter she wrote to him while he was away at
Bishopgate, right around the time when he would have been composing “Alastor,” one of the
main focuses of this thesis. Richard Holmes points out that her real fears were not his separation
from her, but that:
The real basis for her fears was revealed in a brief paragraph that came
unexpectedly in the middle of her letter. ‘Pray is Clary with you? for I have
enquired several times & no letters – but seriously it would not in the least
surprise me if you have written to her from London & let her know that you are
there without me that she should have taken some such freak - ’ (Holmes, “Up the
River” 287)
Holmes continues to point out that it is unknown whether Claire was indeed with Shelley at this
time, but her worry about the action speaks louder than the possible action itself.
When Shelley returns he shares a quiet domestic life with Mary for a time which
undoubtedly consisted of discussions between the two of his works, certainly of “Alastor: Or the
Spirit of Solitude.” This poem follows a young Poet on the quest for his idealized love and retells
his inevitable death following the unrealizable dream. The philosophical ideas of love that
Shelley explores in this work were something he intensely struggled with, but Mary may not
have agreed with the conclusions the poem draws. Richard Holmes points out that:
When Mary Edited Alastor, it is suggestive that she tried to draw a veil across the
subject matter and implications of the poem…Mary wrote in 1839, ‘This is
neither the time nor the place to speak of the misfortunes that chequered his life. It
will be sufficient to say that, in all he did, he at the time of doing it believed

3
himself justified to his own conscience; while the various ills of poverty and loss
of friends brought home to him the sad realities of life. Physical suffering had also
considerable influence in causing him to turn his eyes inward; inclining him rather
to brood over the thoughts and emotions of his own soul than to glance abroad,
(Holmes, “Up the River” 306).
Instead of referring to the actual subject matter of the poem, she almost makes an excuse for him
pointing to their difficulties around the time “Alastor” was written. But seems to believe that
Mary altogether avoided facing Shelley’s views on love and his disappointments surrounding it,
when in actuality, she engaged the subject matter but in a similar manner as her husband—
through her writing.
The story of how the young Mary Shelley thought of and wrote one of the most famous
pieces of horror fiction of all time is nearly as infamous as the novel itself. She, Shelley, Byron
and another, less known, man named Polidori, sat around one dreary summer reading the ghost
stories of others until Byron proposed a contest between the group, to see who could write the
best horror story. After many days of not a single thought the horrific nightmare of a student
standing over a patchwork man of dead flesh stirring to life provides Mary with her own creative
spark and leads her produce the novel as we know it today.
This origin story is almost too good to be true, however, and a little too simple for Mary
Shelley’s talent. Though the story is undoubtedly true, the idea of Mary’s mind being a
completely blank slate before this dream came to her is a little absurd, especially when you take
her husband’s work into account. The dream vision was “Like the fierce fiend of a distempered

4
dream.”2 But this is not a description of her nightmare, but a line from Shelley’s “Alastor” that
nearly perfectly describes it. This is too close to be a mere coincidence and points to a perhaps
obvious fact—that artists with such fraught lives will inevitably manifest their experiences in
their work.
Though critics have made the argument that Shelley’s poem “Alastor” and the themes it
explored heavily influenced Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein this thesis focuses instead on how the
novel is a response. Between Shelley’s fickle nature in relationships proved by his abandonment
of his first wife, as well as his sexual deviance with Claire Clairmont, it is not surprising that his
struggles with the definition of a perfect love is explored in his poetry. It should be equally
unsurprisingly then, that Mary would do the same, taking the opportunity in her work to respond
and explore this and similar concepts.
Before we begin the examination of how these ideas manifest and correspond in the work
of these two authors, a quick note on the text. Though many scholars prefer to use the 1818
edition of Frankenstein because of its status as a first edition and it being seen as the most
“pure.” For the purposes of this thesis, however, the 1831 edition was used including the edits
Mary Shelley made after her husband’s death. This is because of a heavy focus on the
introduction to this edition in chapter two. Regardless of any so-called purity, Mary Shelley
made the edits herself and therefore it should be respected as the form of the novel she wished
presented to her readership.
As Mary Shelley fondly referred to Frankenstein in her introduction, her novel is not
simply her own ‘hideous progeny’ but a work born out of the literary merits of her entire family,
2

Abrams, M. H., and Stephen Greenblatt. “Alastor” The Norton Anthology of English Literature.
7th ed. Vol. 2A. New York: Norton, 2000. 702-19. Print. Line 26.

5
but especially that of her future husband. She is not the passive, feminine author she is
sometimes portrayed as being, instead engaging her own work with that of Shelley’s, exploring
his ideas further and taking them in a new direction. This is the most evident in references to
“Alastor,” specifically the poem’s failed criticism of a form of narcissistic love focused around
the “anti-type,” a projection of the ideal self. Mary instead takes this criticism and illustrates the
true horrible potential that Percy Shelley seemed blind to, or simply unwilling to see. Mary’s
hideous progeny is also the offspring of this perhaps misguided ideal, proving a very keen
literary eye and master craftsmanship underneath her seminal story of fervent isolationism, the
release of a horrific phantasm, and the terrifying consequence of an unchecked intellectualism.

6
Chapter I
Double Double: Narcissistic Love and Its Multitudes in “Alastor”
If we reason, we would be understood; if we imagine, we would that the airy children of our
brain were born anew within another’s; if we feel, we would that another’s nerves should vibrate
to our own, that the beams of their eyes should kindle at once and mix and melt into our own,
that burning with the heart’s best blood. This is Love. This is the bond and the sanction which
connects not only man with man but with everything which exists. We are born into the world,
and there is something within us which, from the instant that we live, more and more thirsts after
its likeness.—Percy Bysshe Shelley3
A Need to Flesh out the Anti-Type
The above quote may be the young Shelley’s most clearly articulated attempt to answer a
question that many artists have deemed to be indefinite—What is love? Love is not simply an
emotion for Shelley, but it seems, an entirely new method of existence—a life born anew with
the full integration of another. Our physical make-up must pulse in tandem, the spiritual presence
we convey through our eyes must meld into a single shade. We search for what is like us so that
it may become us. This, as Shelley boldly states, is love. This passage appears in Shelley’s essay
simply entitled “Essay on Love,” written sometime between 1814 and 1815. Traditionally, critics
have taken this essay to be directed at Mary Shelley4, the young girl with whom he ran away
from his first unhappy marriage. A letter from Shelley to his good friend Thomas Jefferson Hogg
on October 3rd, 1814 nearly confirms this assumption when he writes of the young Mary:
I speak thus of Mary now…and so intimately are our natures now united, that I
feel whilst I describe her excellencies as if I were an egoist expatiating upon his

3

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, and Richard Holmes. "Essay On Love." Shelley on Love: An Anthology.
Berkeley: University of California, 1980. Print. 71.

4

Holmes, Richard. “Up the River: Bishopgate 1815.” Shelley: The Pursuit. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1975. Print. 299.

7
own perfections. Then how deeply did I not feel my inferiority, how willingly
confess myself far surpassed in originality, in genuine elevation & magnificence
of the intellectual nature until she consented to share her capabilities with me. I
speedily conceived an ardent passion to posses this inestimable treasure. (P. B.
Shelley, “Love Reborn” 60)
Shelley’s actions as described in this letter—the pursuit of Mary, the need to take ownership of
her, and their eventual perceived inextricableness—are a near perfect template for his own
criteria of love as laid out in the musings of his notebook that would become “On Love.”
Unfortunately, not all is ideal in Shelley and Mary’s relationship as one may initially
glean from the rapture expressed above. Unlike the clear overflow of idealized and seemingly
unshakable romantic love present in this letter to Hogg, the essay “On Love” itself begins with
the realization of distance between himself and Mary. The essay begins:
I know not the internal constitution of other men, nor even yours whom I now
address. I see that in some external attributes they resemble me but when misled
by that appearance I have thought to appeal to something in common and
unburdened my inmost soul to them, I have found my language misunderstood
like one in a distant and savage land. (P. B. Shelley, “On Love” 71)
It seems as though Shelley’s initial impression of perfect semblance between himself and Mary
has shifted and he recognizes the inevitable disjointed nature of their relationship. As Shelley
continues this introduction to his essay exploring love, he expands his frustration over the rift
between himself and Mary to a frustration with every relationship he has, declaring “with a spirit
ill fitted to sustain such proof, trembling and feeble through its tenderness, I have sought
sympathy and found only repulse and disappointment,” (P. B. Shelley, “On Love” 71).

8
Regardless of this recognition of the gap present between himself and Mary, and the admission
of the seeming impossibility of the absence of such a gap, Shelley goes on to assert and insist
upon a love build around what he calls the “anti-type; the meeting with an understanding capable
of clearly estimating our own; an imagination which should enter into and seize upon the subtle
and delicate peculiarities which we have delighted to cherish and unfold in secret,” (P. B.
Shelley, “One Love” 72). Richard Holmes, in his biography, Shelley: The Pursuit, perhaps best
summarized the conclusions of “On Love,” which in spite of the tensions put forth by its
unattainability, “that ideal self or ‘prototype’ to be discovered within the lover’s own heart. The
beloved remains, in other words, an ideal projection of the self, which by definition must be
unchanging, self-sufficient and therefore ultimately sterile,” (Holmes, “Up the River” 303).
Shelley found the concrete definition to the anti-typical structure of love in his prose, but
it was not until he set out on the second long poem of his career5, the 720 lined “Alastor; or, The
Spirit of Solitude” that Shelley truly begins to explore the true implications of this philosophy.
The poem and its preface were both written in the autumn of 1815 at Bishopgate, around the time
of the previously discussed letter to Hogg, though it is not clear whether letter or poem was
written first. At this time, Mary had temporarily excluded from the household her step-sister
Claire Clairmont, of whom Shelley was quite fond and perhaps sexually involved with as well.6
This circumstance may have further prompted Shelley’s musing on love, which resulted with
“Alastor.” As Richard Holmes describes, Shelley “had pressed the search into the caverns of his
own mind as far as he could go in prose. He now sought the even greater formality and
distancing of poetry,” (Holmes, “Up the River” 300) and the narcissistic love archetype of the
5

Holmes, Richard. “Up the River: Bishopgate 1815.” Shelley: The Pursuit. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1975. Print. 299-300.
6
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, and Richard Holmes. “Second Marriage.” Shelley on Love: An
Anthology. Berkeley: University of California, 1980. Print. 67.

9
anti-type continued to be a central theme, to be critiqued, sought for, romanticized, condemned,
and mourned in Shelley’s work. If we take “On Love” to be Shelley’s academic exploration of
his ideas of love, we can then read “Alastor” as a spiritual thought experiment—an exercise to
take his ideas and push them to their limits in a form outside of himself though deeply saturated
in his own terms.
The Initial Dichotomy—The Two Poets
“Alastor” presents a spiritual exploration on the part of the narrator, or as Shelley himself
insists at the start of the Preface, the poem “may be considered as allegorical of one of the most
interesting situations of the human mind,” (P. B. Shelley, “Preface” 703). Given Shelley’s past
manner of discussing the matter of love within terms of the very personal and biographical as in
his contemporaneous “Essay on Love,” the reader is primed to read this poem with an
autobiographical lens. Perhaps knowing or fearing this, or perhaps if only for his own personal
journey through grappling with ineffable qualities of his idealized version of love, Shelley,
according to Holmes, “wrote the poem precisely in order to distance himself from his own lived
experience,” (Holmes, “Up the River” 303). This attempt to distance himself from the subject
matter of the poem is quite obvious when examining the structure of the poem in its entirety.
At the onset, the reader is confronted not with verse but with the prose of a preface, in
which, Shelley clearly draws a judgment against the absolute devotion to the “anti-typical”
construction of love, claiming that those who prefer solitude and self-centeredness to “human
sympathy,” “languish, because none feel with them their common nature. They are morally dead.
They are neither friends, nor lovers, nor fathers, nor citizens of the world, nor benefactors of
their country,” (P. B. Shelley, “Preface” 703). Shelley is careful, obstinate even, to draw the
reader’s attention to this judgment early on in the experience of the poem, seemingly divorcing

10
him from the poet subject of the work. This heavy-handedness and insistence upon his presence
as the author of the work, however he may claim to disapprove of the action of the poem, may
actually work against any intention to distance himself from the Poet who is the subject of the
poem because it draws him into conjunction with the poet narrator whose own preface and coda
frame the structure of “Alastor.” The dichotomy and inextricability of the ‘narrator poet’ and
‘subject Poet’ makes Shelley’s self-assertion of identity with the narrator poet problematic as it
draws attention to his contradictory attitudes present in the preface and those present in the text
of the poem itself.
The poem begins in a manner one might expect from an icon of the Romantic period,
calling back to the classical traditions with an apostrophe to the muse, in this case, mother
nature. The first stanza is one of praise to the great immensity of creation, saturated with
descriptive language of the world that houses and inspires this poet narrator, but overall a rather
generic or expected beginning to a poem. The second stanza continues this praise but in language
that is much more dynamic and personal, turning away from general description to the actual cry
for literary aid from the narrator poet. He pleads:
Favour my solemn song, for I have loved
Thee ever, and thee only; I have watched
Thy shadow, and the darkness of thy steps,
And my heart ever gazes on the depth
Of thy deep mysteries.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Hoping to still these obstinate questionings
Of thee and thine

.

.

.

(P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 18-23, 26-27)

11
Here, the love of the narrator poet perhaps extends beyond the expectations of the reader. Nature
is the sole object of the narrator poet’s love and devotion and this love is described in terms of an
insatiable and even voyeuristic obsession. This laudation of nature is extreme and implicates the
narrator poet in the same sort of isolation warned against in the preface of “Alastor.” Already,
there is a discord between what the preface claims the poem sets out to do and what the text of
the poem actually conveys.
However the narrator poet, although his love is reserved exclusively for nature, is not
completely alone. In his continuing ode to nature he refers to a partner through whose mutual
love he attempts to find deeper understanding of the wonders of nature:
.

.

.

In lone and silent hours,

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Have I mixed awful talk and asking looks
With my most innocent love, until strange tears
Uniting with those breathless kisses, made
Such magic as compels the charmed night
To render up thy charge:…and, though ne’er yet
Thou hast unveil’d they inmost sanctuary, (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 29, 33-38)
In what may seem to be a contradiction to the narrator poet’s earlier claims that nature is the sole
proprietor of his love, he introduces a second figure who also possesses his love and is referred
to as actually being his love. If we identify the narrator poet as Shelley himself, as his assertion
of authorial presence in the preface would lead us to, then it may be that this “innocent love” of
the poem is a thinly veiled reference to Mary who, as we know from “On Love,” he had not
previously scrupled to make blatant reference to. The exact significance of this will be explored

12
at greater length in a later chapter, but for now it is important to keep in mind the possibility of
an autobiographical mapping, though not to think of the poem exclusively with lens.
The contradiction between the poet narrator’s sole love for nature and his love for this
unnamed figure is reconciled because his love for the unnamed figure serves only to attempt to
understand more intimately the mysteries that pervade through nature. But regardless of how
“innocent” the narrator poet claims his love for this figure is, the language used to describe the
exploration of nature is very sexual. The “tears” and “breathless kisses,” create the sense of a
building passion that quickens and “compels” until the action reaches the self-censored climax
represented by the ellipses. But this method of the exploration of the ideal of nature through
sexual means fails. Nature remains above comprehension. Regardless of this failure, the narrator
poet continues his journey to understanding, “I wait thy breath, Great Parent, that my strain/May
modulate with murmurs of the air,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 45-46).
The narrator poet then moves to immediately introduce the character of the Poet, or the
‘subject Poet,’ around whom the narrative action of the poem takes place. This structural choice
on the part of Shelley, at first seems to suggest an emphasized or even insured degree of removal
between himself and the physical and spiritual journey the subject Poet embarks on as “Alastor”
unfolds. However, though the form implies this distancing the actual language of the poem
implies just the opposite. The first contradiction in the text that would imply a closeness of the
narrator poet to the subject Poet occurs in the lines, “no lorn bard/Breathed o’er his dark fate one
melodious sigh:/He lived, he died, he sung, in solitude,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 58-60). This
presence of a claim that no poet mourned the loss of the subject Poet seems extremely odd in a
poem with the exact purpose of retelling the subject Poet’s life and eventual death. This
contradictory statement is either simply a self-effacing comment on the part of narrator poet or it

13
implies a deeper connection between narrator poet and subject Poet. As the poem continues the
latter possibility is the one that becomes more plausible as the language itself begins to reflect
the similarities and intimate knowledge between the two poets, rather and only circumstance.
After this initial, brief description of the subject Poet’s inevitable doom that the narrator
poet somehow has access to knowledge of though he claims the subject Poet lived in solitude,
the narrator poet turns to a description of the subject Poet as he lived:
.

.

.

Every sight

And sound from the vast earth and ambient air,
Sent to his heart its choicest impulses.
The fountains of divine philosophy
Fled not his thristing lips
.

.

.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Nature’s most secret steps

.

.

He like her shadow has pursued, (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 68-72, 81-82)
The very first impression the reader received of the subject Poet as he lived is one of a man with
an intense respect and love for nature and an insatiable thirst for answers to her greater
mysteries. This is nearly an exact replica of the manner in which the narrator poet introduces
himself. As the poem continues, the language that now describes the subject Poet’s relationship
to nature is lifted straight from that which described the narrator poet’s relationship only a few
lines previously. Bother are journeying after nature but are only able to access her indirectly,
through her shadow. Such repetition and within such close proximity to each other cannot be
mere coincidence. Shelley is drawing attention specifically to his failure to distance himself from
what he is aware is the flawed ideal of the anti-type. Being aware of this of failure adds a more

14
dynamic component to the drama of the rest of the poem, creating a nuanced and conflicted
exploration of anti-typcial love, rather than the moralizing critique that Shelley initially primes
the reader to expect. The correlations between narrator poet and subject Poet reach a pinnacle
right at the first dramatic turn of the poem where Shelley truly begins to delve into the meaning
of the pursuit of the anti-type through the introduction of the subject Poet’s vision of the veiled
maid.
The Veiled Maid—Prototype and the Anti-Type
Given the already linked relationship between the narrator poet and the subject Poet,
Shelley has set up a narrative that is dependant on dualism. Thus, we are readied to spot
correlations between characters of similar natures as perhaps having a more cohesive
relationship. Almost immediately after the emphasis of the similitude between the two poets of
“Alastor,” the reader is met with subsequent repetitive imagery, this time between the “Arab
maiden” and the “veiled maid.” The reader first meets the Arab maiden in a description which at
first seems to only serve as a device for the narrator poet to continue his narrative and praise of
the subject Poet. He describes her unrequited interest, narrating how she:
.

.

.

stole

from duties and repose to tend his steps,
Enamoured, yet not daring for deep awe
To speak her love, and watched his nightly sleep,
Sleepless herself, to gaze upon his lips,
Parted in slumber, whence the regular breath
Of innocent dreams arose; then, when red morn
Made paler the pale moon, to her cold home

15
Wildered, and wan, and panting, she returned. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 131-139)
While these lines do work to illustrate the love the subject Poet garnered from those around him,
it is too long and too specific an aside to simply posit the Arab maiden as a throw away
character. Shelley primarily brings attention to her significance by the fact that her description
stands alone as its own stanza and this importance is only emphasized by the language she is
described in. She is the active opposite to the subject Poet’s passivity. She goes out of her way to
tend to the poet, while she loses sleep over him he slumbers on. When his breath is regular and
calm hers is bewildered and panting. But, although her affections for the subject Poet are active
in that they cause her to care for the Poet and to distemper her breath, she remains, like the
subject Poet, passive. She is silent, too smitten by the subject Poet to dare converse, completely
cutting off any chance of a spiritual connection. Throughout this entire stanza, there is absolutely
no indication of any agency from the Poet. The pure physicality of the Arab maiden’s attempts to
relate to the subject Poet do not seem to interest him in the slightest, and without even a hint of
recognition of her, the subject Poet continues on his journey.
The passivity that the subject Poet exhibits towards the Arab maiden continues to be one
of his defining features as the poem goes on. After this stanza of rest with the Arab maiden, both
the subject Poet and reader partake in a whirlwind, almost supernatural itinerary:
The Poet wandering on through Arabie
And Persia, and the wild Carmanian waste,
And o’er the aerial mountains which pour down
Indus and Oxus from their icy caves,
In joy and exultation held his way;
Till in the vale of Cashmire, (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 140-145)

16
The locations the subject Poet passes through on his travels are listed roughly west to east as they
are geographically located. The quick succession of these places gives the reader a sense of a
great distance he travels, though without much labor on his part. This almost passive process in
his journey is emphasized by the use of the verb “wandering.” There is no purpose to his travels,
regardless of the fact that they are seemingly vast. This listing of locations used in the first six
lines of this stanza can have one of several effects on the reader. The first is simply to give the
poem a sense of an exotic atmosphere. Other than the names of the locations, Shelley provides
hardly any other defining or individual characteristics to these locations. This quick procession
of foreign locations has the effect of blurring all of them into one great other—the Orient. While
on the one hand this could be a chauvinistic and imperialistic ignorance to the differences
between these locations, it also gives an almost superhuman characteristic to the subject Poet. As
mentioned above, the language describing the toil such a venture should theoretically entail is
absent, instead the subject Poet is merely “wandering on,” requiring little exertion on his part.
This superhuman ability to travel, however, may not be only in a physical sense. The vast scope
of his travels also gives a dreamlike quality to the poem, pushing the reader not only deeper into
a foreign physical landscape but also deeper into the exploration of the theoretical mindscape of
Shelley. Placing the subject Poet into the foreign lands of the Orient may also work to again
illustrate the intentioned distance between Shelley and the subject matter of the poem, but the
narrator poet sweeps over these locations so quickly it serves instead to illustrate Shelley’s
assertion that the imagination is truly the setting for this journey into the other.
Once the poet reaches Kashmir he decides to rest. This rest, however, does not seem to be
out of necessity. He has “languid limbs,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 149) he is not exhausted but
merely disinclined or simply too lazy to move. He finds his resting spot amongst the foreign

17
foliage and although he describes the spot as lonely, he also interestingly uses the word “bower,”
(P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 147). While bower can mean a natural, idealized abode this word can
also be a reference to a private apartment, especially that of a lady.7 In other words, although the
subject Poet is alone, the reader also has the sense that he an outsider or perhaps even an
intruder. This idea of the subject Poet intruding upon the space of a lady is emphasized by the
fact that Shelley introduces the veiled maid immediately after the subject Poet makes the
decision to rest inside this natural bower. As the subject Poet drowses:
.

.

.

He dreamed a veiled maid

Sate near him, talking in low solemn tones.
Her voice was like the voice of his own soul
Heard in the calm of thought: its music long,
Like woven sounds of streams and breezes, held
His inmost sense suspended in its web
Of many-coloured woof and shifting hues.
Knowledge and truth and virtue were her theme,
And lofty hopes of divine liberty,
Thoughts the most dear to him, and poesy,
Herself a poet. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 151-161)
Instead of being faced with the passive subject Poet of the previous sections of the poem, we
have a subject Poet who is beginning to be actively engaged. This veiled maid, who although
hearkens back to the Arab maiden in perhaps appearance—the veil being a stereotypical staple of
middle-eastern garb—the two female figures could not be more unalike. The Arab maiden is
7

“bower, 2b.” The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989. OED Online. Oxford University
Press. 10 March 2012 <http://oed.com>

18
quiet, the veiled maid’s voice is like a song. The Arab maiden appeals only to the subject Poet’s
physicality, the veiled maid to his philosophy. Regardless of this opposition between the two
women, it is clear that the Arab maiden is the prototype for the anti-typical vision of the veiled
maid.
Although thus far the reader has been familiar with a relatively passive subject Poet, in
the above stanza we see him begin to have agency—It is he who dreams of the veiled maid.
However, because the subject Poet visions the veiled maid in such quick succession after the
assertion that he may be intruding upon her natural or spiritual habitat, there is a shadow of doubt
about who exactly has agency over whom. Does the landscape infect the subject Poet into this fit
or is he forcing his own ideals upon a representative of the other? The subject Poet at once
intrudes upon a space outside of himself and internally creates the figure which, as rest of the
above stanza emphasizes, he will project his own ideals onto. The stanza continues, describing
the veiled maid only in terms of nature or the intellectual ideas that she shares with the subject
Poet. But she is not simply similar to the subject Poet, the language emphasizes that she, in fact,
is the subject Poet. The conceit that she is veiled only helps to define her as the subject Poet
because she has no individually defining physical characteristics—she is faceless and eventually,
formless.
The poem’s description of this vision takes a turn from being a gentle, perhaps even
mothering or docile portrayal of the veiled maid, to one that shows off her capability for feeling
and inspiring fiery, lustful passion. This display of heated emotions begins as soon as the veiled
maid’s soft tonal speech shifts to the art of song:
`.

.

.

her fair hands

Were bare alone, sweeping from some strange harp

19
Strange symphony, and in their branching veins
The eloquent blood told an ineffable tale.
The beating of her heart was heard to fill
The pauses of her music, and her breath
Tumultuously accorded with those fits
Of intermitted song. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 165-172)
Interestingly, Shelley here begins to describe the veiled maid not in terms that would emphasis
the ephemeral aspects of a vision, but in very physical, bodily language. This physicality,
however, is subjugated by terms belonging to that of nature. The vision may have veins but they
are branching veins. The “strange harp” may be a reference to the Eolian harp, a trope frequently
found in Romantic era poetry. The use of this image—a harp that is normally played upon by the
wind—adds to this confusion between the veiled maid’s physical body and the landscape around
her. Her entire being and the music she creates, it seems, are meld into each other, her heartbeats
forming the baseline to her song, her breath, creating cadence. Once again, Shelley has confused
the exact origins and nature of the veiled maid and this mixed imagery only continues as the
veiled maid’s song plays on.
Unable to contain the passion of her song, the veiled maid soon stands and continues to
artistic outpouring. It is not until this moment that the subject Poet finds his agency within the
vision itself. He finally turns towards the woman of his dreams and:
And saw by the warm light of their own life
Her glowing limbs, beneath the sinuous veil
Of woven wind, her outspread arms now bare,
Her dark locks floating in the breath of night,

20
Her beamy bending eyes, her parted lips
Outstretched, and pale, and quivering eagerly.
His strong heart sunk and sickened with excess
Of love. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 175-182)
In our first instance of truly seeing the subject Poet react to the veiled maid, Shelley once again
uses language that suggests the subject Poet and the veiled maid are one in the same, and
importantly, that the subject Poet recognizes this fact. He first views the veiled maid in light
emitted by “their own life,” they are inextricable. The description continues and the language
becomes more and more sexually saturated, yet still maintaining a juxtaposition between terms
of the body and terms of nature. Her veil is at once manifesting as raw and muscular yet light and
transient as the wind. She has progress from bare hands to now completely bare arms giving the
reader the sense that she is unveiling although her veil has taken on an aspect of a physical part
of her being. Finally, there is a bit of a role reversal. Whereas before, the Arab maiden fawned
over the subject Poet’s lips parted in sleep, it is not the subject Poet who sickens with love at the
sight of this sexually inviting gesture. This reversal of descriptive language as this passionately
charged stanza reaches climax.
In what seems to be an uncontrollable fit and need to meet the passion of the veiled maid
and act upon the love he feels full to burst with, the subject Poet:
.

.

.

reared his shuddering limbs and quelled

His gasping breath, and spread his arms to meet
Her panting bosom:…she drew back a while,
Then, yielding to irresistible joy,
With frantic gesture and short breathless cry

21
Folded his frame into her dissolving arms.
Now blackness veiled his dizzy eyes, and night
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Rolled back its impulse on his vacant brain. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 182-188,
191)
The veiled maid is no longer described in terms of the subject Poet but instead, now the subject
Poet is described in terms of the veiled maid. His breath is now matched to hers and he is
shuddering with anticipation. This role reversal acts to cement the comingling of their beings, he
is not simply projecting himself onto her but they become literally inseparable and
indistinguishable. And indeed this melding of forms is the sexual and literal climax of the poem.
When the veiled maid and the subject Poet finally meet, it is only for a fleeting moment as the
veiled maid dissolves away. But there is ambiguity about what exactly happens—the subject
Poets folds into her, yet it is the veiled maid who disappears. The subject Poet awakes and finds
himself alone but not completely without traces of the veiled maid left behind. He is now veiled
as the maid once was and yet his vision of her has left him, his brain vacant.
Throughout this scene of the veiled maid, Shelley has illustrated the potential frustrations
of the narcissistic structure love of the anti-type to some extent. We as readers are presented with
the subject Poet passing on the opportunity for relations with another member of the tangible
world in favor for the company of one who exists solely in his imagination. The end of this
stanza serves to convey the inability for such a relationship to be resolved—instead the climax is
interrupted by the veiled maid’s desertion of the subject Poet, she falls back into him. But
regardless of this frustration and lack of conclusion the narrative of the love of the anti-type does
not read as a sharp critique illustrating the failures of such a relationship. Nearly the entire

22
narrative of the veiled maid is steeped in erotic and alluring language not only failing to convey
the horrors of such a relationship but also working in the opposite direction to paint it as alluring
and desirable. This failure becomes even more interesting when we consider the parallels
between the above passage and a passage from early in the introduction to the poem before the
narrator poet begins the brunt of his narrative. We see the same ellipses standing in for orgasm in
the above passage as we do when the narrator poet, or Shelley himself, is narrating his own
frustrations in accessing the great secrets of nature. Once again, there is not a formal distancing
between Shelley and his subject matter as Holmes suggests, but an emphasis drawing them
closer together. What Shelley has presented us thus far in “Alastor” is a nuanced and delicate
conflict within himself concerning this subject matter of narcissistic love that he already has
explored in prose. Once the subject Poet awakes from his dream, these conflicting attitudes
around the metaphor of the veiled maid continue as he begins his search for her.
Echoing Myth
The remaining narrative of “Alastor” follows the subject Poet who, extremely shaken by
his vision of the veiled maid, continues his journey, this time in search for the vision. But his
search is in vain, he find no physical trace of her. Regardless of his inability to find the veiled
maid, the subject Poet still ignores the advances of the women of reality but they fail to
understand him, they “would interpret half the woe/That wasted him, would call him false names
Brother, and friend,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 267-268). These youthful maiden’s inability to
access the troubles of the subject Poet cause his own indifference towards them, preferring
instead to pursue the ideal veiled maid, who only taunts him with her presence in his tortured
dreams.. As his wandering search becomes more and more hopeless the subject Poet has a
sudden realization:

23
.

.

.

A gloomy smile

Of desperate hope wrinkled his quivering lips.
For sleep, he knew, kept most relentlessly
Its precious charge, and silent death exposed,
Faithless perhaps as sleep, a shadowy lure,
With doubtful smile mocking its own strange charms. (P. B. Shelley 290-295)
This passage describes the subject Poet’s first thoughts of the possibility of union with his
dreamed beloved in death. The subject Poet begins to equate sleep and death but has not yet
fallen completely for the possible allure of such a sacrifice. Yet regardless of this doubt, the fact
that both the subject Poet and death are smiling at the prospect, equates them. It seems that the
subject Poet does not only project his ideals onto the world around him but also his fears. The
following stanza begins, “Startled by his own thoughts he looked around./There was no fair fiend
near him, not a sight/Or sound of awe but in his own deep mind,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 296298). Somehow, the subject Poet has scared himself into thinking that his own thoughts of death
were not inspired within him at all but instead by some physical outer force. An actual being who
is pursuing him as he is pursuing the maid. This is the first appearance of the alastor of the
poem’s title. This term, transliterated from ancient Greek8, refers both to the pursuer and the
pursued, so not only do we have their equality in action but also in name. It seems that although
the subject Poet is pushing himself further and further into solitude, he is not truly distancing
himself from anyone and, in fact, is experiencing several doppelgangers—first with the veiled
maid and now with the a manifestation of hi desperate thoughts to find her. This doubling comes
to a head when the subject Poet pauses his wild wanderings to look at himself in a pool:
8

Abrams, M. H., and Stephen Greenblatt. “Alastor” The Norton Anthology of English Literature.
7th ed. Vol. 2A. New York: Norton, 2000. Print. 702.

24
.

.

.

His eyes beheld

Their own wan light through reflected lines
Of his thin hair, distinct in the dark depth
Of that still fountain: as the human heart,
Gazing in dreams over the gloomy grave,
Sees its own treacherous likeness there. He heard
The motion of the leaves,
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

A Spirit seemed

.
.

.
.

.

.

To stand beside him. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 469-475, 479-480)
This image of the subject Poet looking into his own reflection is perhaps the most overt reference
Shelley makes to the Narcissus and Echo myth of ancient Greek mythology. Though, as Holmes
asserts, the entirety of “Alastor” roughly follows the outline of the myth,9 a youth vainly
searching for his ideal beauty, the imagery of the above stanza more concretely directs the reader
to the myth. Keeping this point in mind, it is interesting to consider that this is also one of the
first instances of a direct, judgmental tone of the subject Poet’s actions. Like Echo, the subject
Poet has been chasing his ideal and causing himself to wither, but Shelley is also reminding us
that the subject Poet is meant to be this figure of Narcissus as well, in love only with the ideal of
himself. But instead of gazing into his reflection and seeing the beauty he seeks, he sees only a
sallow and aged visage. The subject Poet himself sees the damage his fruitless voyage has
caused, and again finds himself with visions of his death and an uncanny awareness of the dark
Spirit pursing him. This Spirit is described in oxymoron, it is a spirit, ephemeral, yet it is the
9

Holmes, Richard. “Up the River: Bishopgate 1815.” Shelley: The Pursuit. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1975. Print. 300.

25
physical movement of the leaves that alerts the subject Poet to its presence. The thing is not
entirely present, though, as it only “seems” to stand beside the subject Poet.
This ambiguity of the corporality of the pursuing spirit continues to be emphasized as the
stanza concludes:
Now deepening the dark shades, for speech assuming
Held commune with him, as if he and it
Were all that was,—only…when his regard
Was raised by intense pensiveness,…two eyes,
Two starry eyes, hung in the gloom of thought,
And seemed with their serene and azure smiles
To beckon him. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 486-492)
Here, the subject Poet and the Spirit hold in a moment of private and intimate recognition, and
though they are both speechless they seem to understand each other in a wordless conversation.
This relation between them runs so deep the narrator poet describes it as akin to as if the subject
Poet and the Spirit were the only two beings in existence. This has an interesting dualistic effect
in that it at once serves to separate the two but also to bring them together. There is a moment,
represented by the ellipses, when the Spirit seems to disappear. Shelley neglects to explicitly
mention the nature of this disappearance but given that previously in the poem the ellipses has
stood in for sexual union, it may be that the Spirit here has joined with the subject Poet. When he
attempts to look at the Spirit he finds not the spirit, but the eyes of his veiled maid, encouraging
him onward in his journey. This not only serves to equate the pursuit of the veiled maid with the
looming Spirit but also acts to strengthen Shelley’s emphasis of the doubling of the subject
Poet’s role as both Narcissus and Echo. The language in this stanza makes it unclear whether or

26
not the subject Poet has ever taken his gaze off of his own reflection, implying the eyes of the
veiled maid may in fact be a reflection of his own eyes that entice him and urge him on in his
journey.
Shelley’s use of the myth of Narcissus and Echo brings a nuance to his treatment of love
based around the anti-type. While this myth seems an obvious choice, given that the anti-type is
dependant upon a love of the self, by transforming the subject Poet into both the agent of selflove and the pursuer of ideal love, it serves to highlight the true isolation of such a pursuit. The
two agents of the myth have been reduced to the one of the poem. The use of this myth also
gives “Alastor” an air of a cautionary tale, especially when the poem is reduced to summary of
its narrative. We as readers really begin to see the deep conflict within Shelley towards his ideas
about love. This conflict within Shelley continues to manifest until the powerfully sympathetic
language of subject Poet’s conclusion overshadows any of Shelley’s attempts to give the poem a
tone of admonition.
A Cautionary Elegy
Egged on by the enticing gaze of the veiled maid, the subject Poet returns to his pursuit in
earnest making his way through beautiful descriptions of the natural world around him. Yet still
he travels on, until he reaches an area where “One step,/One human step alone, has ever
broken/The stillness of its solitude:” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 588-590). Not only is the subject
Poet alone but he has reached an area of nature where no other human has ever tread, securing
his absolute solitude. It is shortly after coming upon this undisturbed earth that “he knew that
death/Was on him,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 626-627). He returns to the position in which he
first vision his veiled maid, “upon an ivied stone/Reclined his languid head, his limbs did rest,”
(P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 634-635). His entire being seems to have returned to the state in which

27
he first glimpsed his ideal love, going from the very active pursuit to once again having a
“passive being,” (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 630). As the subject Poet draws closer and closer to
death, staring out at the moon with a smile upon his lips, the narrator poet presents the reader
with the following description:
.

.

.

the Poet’s blood,

That ever beat in mystic sympathy
With nature’s ebb and flow, grew feebler still:
And when two lessening points of light alone
Gleamed through the darkness, the alternate gasp
Of his faint respiration scare did stir
The stagnate night:—till the minutest ray
Was quenched, the pulse yet lingered in his hear.
It paused—it fluttered. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 651-659)
The moon, the subject Poet’s final sight, makes its descent behind the mountain and as it makes
its journey, its light slowly winking out, the subject Poet’s life energy drains in equal rhythm.
The subject Poet’s life energy has become in sync with nature, his death coinciding with the
disappearance of the moon. This portrait of the subject Poet’s death is far from horrendous, if
anything the situation and the language describing it romanticize this form of death. His death
does not come in some shocking, sudden, or painful manner, as one may expect in a cautionary
tale, but instead the subject Poet is at peace, smiling, and calmly allowing his life’s energy to ebb
away at the will of nature.
This depiction of the subject Poet’s death is not simply a romantic and perhaps even
alluring one, but it also illustrates the subject Poet’s melting into the world around him. Although

28
he has doomed himself this fate through a narcissistic and solitary pursuit of his anti-type, this
doomed fate is not one described as being terribly damning. The subject Poet instead of being
truly ostracized by his actions becomes a part of the landscape around him, and becomes the
idealized tool of nature. The narrator poet now describes the subject Poet’s body as a:
.

.

.

wondrous frame—

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

A fragile lute, on whose harmonious strings
The breath of heaven did wander—a bright stream
Once fed with many-voiced waves—a dream
Of youth, which night and time have quenched for ever,
Still, dark, and dry, and unremembered now. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 665, 667671)
Although with his passing the subject Poet is now described in the past tense, this image of him
as the Eolian lute suggests several things. The first is that he has fully coalesced with nature no
longer attempting to access the true beauty of nature but becoming nature’s medium itself. The
second hearkens back to the veiled maid who also was described as such a lute earlier in the
poem. Though it is not directly stated, the subject Poet’s immersion into nature suggests not that
he has become the victim of a lonely death but almost that he has achieved his goal. He may not
physically have ever found the veiled maid yet in his death they seem to now inhabit the same
landscape.
The narrator poet, however, does not celebrate the possibility of post-mortem union. His
tone through the stanza is one both of great reverence and mourning. Perhaps most interesting
about this final narrative stanza is that it ends with a contradiction. The narrator poet claims that

29
the subject Poet’s memory has been completely obliterated by his death in isolation, and yet this
entire poem narrating his story exists. This contradiction then brings the reader’s attention to the
contradiction of the entire final stanza, or narrator poet’s coda. This last part of the poem is
saturated with the language of mourning. With the repetition of the phrase “thou art fled,” (P. B.
Shelley, “Alastor” 686) the text of the stanza reads like a dirge. This is not the ending to a poem
that would speak out against the pursuit of the ideal, but instead ends as an elegy to its
impossibility. The narrator poet then moves onto a description of the subject Poet’s seemingly
exquisite corpse:
.

.

.

Upon those pallid lips

So sweet even in their silence, on those eyes
That image sleep in death, upon that form
Yet safe from the worm’s outrage, let no tear
Be shed—not even in thought. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 699-703)
The focus on the subject Poet’s sweet and pallid lips gives this description of death an almost
erotic tone. We then have the statement that the subject Poet’s body death is the same as his body
in sleep. Once again, we have an indirect nod to the possibility that the veiled maid and the
subject Poet are united in this death—the subject Poet believed the veiled maid was only
accessible through sleep—the erotic language surrounding this sleep serves to emphasize this
possibility.
Yet, the narrator poet again denies the reader the right to mourn, whether in the action of
crying or the mere thought of it. The narrator poet continues to deny mourning:
Let not high verse, mourning the memory
Of that which is no more, or painting’s woe

30
Or sculpture, speak in feeble imagery
Their own cold powers. Art and eloquence,
And all the shews o’the world are frail and vain
To weep a loss that turns their lights to shade. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 707-712)
This seems to be a terribly strong statement to make, especially in a poem doing exactly what
that passage speaks against attempting. The narrator poet does not even limit this ban of
mourning to that of verse but expands it to all of art and expression. This denial of art’s ability to
mourn, as well as the denial that any mourning occurred for the subject Poet at all, increases this
death to implications beyond that of subject Poet. The language of his description also acts to
expand this mournful song to more than just the life of the subject Poet, the poem ends:
.

.

.

when all

If reft at once, when some surpassing Spirit,
Whose light adorned the world around it, leaves,
Those who remain behind, not sobs or groans,
The passionate tumult of a clinging hope;
But pale despair and cold tranquility,
Nature’s vast frame, the web of human things,
Birth and the grave, that are not as they were. (P. B. Shelley, “Alastor” 713-720)
The subject Poet is now described as a “surpassing Spirit” reminiscent of both the veiled maid
and the Spirit who pursued him in his pursuit. Because all of these figures were equated in
language with each other it ascribes a transcendental importance to the subject Poet. His death
not only symbolizes the loss of his life but the loss of his ability to pursue. For the ones left
behind there is no more chance of a passionate chase, however fruitless it may end. They are left

31
with nothing, with the same languid passivity that defined the subject Poet before he found his
vision. What the end of this poem emphasizes is not entirely the dooming effects of solely
pursing after the anti-type in an obsessive and isolating fashion, but how the lack of such a
pursuit is equally damning. There is a great amount of ambivalence in the poem due to this
ending and the layer upon layer of doppelganger between the subject Poet, the veiled maid, and
the Spirit who pursues him and lures him to his death. Then we have the most important
doppelganger, the split between subject Poet and narrator Poet.
This emphasis of the subject Poet’s absolute solitude and never having been mourned by
anyone only draws our attention to the fact that the narrator poet has an intimate knowledge of
the subject Poet and does indeed mourn him, having access to information he claims no one else
has. That is because the subject Poet is to the narrator poet what the veiled maid is to the subject
poet. In other words, the subject Poet plays the role of the anti-type in the vision of the narrator
poet, to act out his ideals in the experimental landscape of poetry. And, through the irony of
Shelley’s insistence on distance between himself, the narrator poet, and the subject Poet, it
becomes clear the three are interrelated. Shelley, in his preface to “Alastor” states, “the picture is
not barren of instruction to actual men. The poet’s self-centered seclusion was avenged by the
furies of an irresistible passion,” (P. B. Shelley, “Preface” 703). But this assertion that “Alastor”
is a tale of caution or admonition is barely held up within the text of the poem itself. As will be
discussed more thoroughly in chapter two, it seems Shelley had a tendency to prime readers with
false assertions in his prefaces. There are certainly moments where the quest of the subject Poet
seems foolish and damning but it is not his action that is criticized, but the hopelessness of the
situation itself. “Alastor” reads as a poem with many intentions. As a cautionary tale to warn
others of the danger of this sort of fanatic self-love, an elegy mourning both the subject Poet and

32
his hopeless pursuit that renders all of art fruitless in its wake. But more than anything, “Alastor”
serves as an exploration into Shelley’s own mind surrounding this subject matter, revealing
contradiction and ambivalence. Shelley’s insistence of “Alastor” being a moralizing poem, as
well as the assertion of several degrees of removal between himself and the characters within the
poem, betray him in the end. Shelley struggled with this subject matter so much so that the poem
does not have a concrete conclusion that passes judgment over the wrong or rightness of the antitype structure of love. Instead, the product of these musings, “Alastor” itself, is the conclusion.
In the face of the poem’s own assertions of the absence and weakness of poetry to convey the
emotions behind such a struggle, “Alastor” became and remains on of Shelley’s most profound
works.

33
Chapter II
A Conversation of Introductions: Comparing the Prefaces of the 1818 and 1831 Editions of
Frankenstein
When Frankenstein first appeared in print, the edition was published anonymously in
1818 with a succinct and somewhat general preface, written by Percy Shelley, common for
novels of the time.. It was not until the second edition was published in 1823 that Mary Shelley
was credited as the author and it was not until 1831 with the printing of the third edition that
Mary’s own introduction was published.10 These two beginnings to Frankenstein are very
different in both style and content although they are both meant to explain the synthesis of the
idea for the novel. Shelley’s introduction presumes to take on the identity of the author of
Frankenstein and seems to almost labor to displace the creation and the opinions of the novel
away from Mary’s imagination in a very impersonal tone. Mary’s introduction, however, has a
near opposite approach. Not only is her tone much more vivid and fanciful but her recollection of
the events that inspired the writing of Frankenstein are much more personal. Unlike Shelley’s
attempt to push responsibility for the story away from the author, Mary embraces it though not
without qualifications that mirror or perhaps even mock Shelley’s strategy. When reading these
two introductions side by side the experience plays out almost like a conversation or a debate
between the two authors that spans both time and death. Shelley makes his assertions and
judgments over Mary’s authority, though not without some praise. Mary, in turn, specifically
mentions or alludes to passages of Shelley’s first edition and then attempts to subtly or outright
debunk them, but not with a vicious tone, her thoughys still with loving regard and respect for
her then late husband.
10

Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Maurice Hindle. “Note on the Text.” Frankenstein, Or, The
Modern Prometheus. London: Penguin, 2003. Print. lviii.

34
Percy Shelley’s Preface to the 1818 edition
The first edition's introduction begins in a manner not unlike other novels of the time—
with a claim that there is some basis in reality for the supernatural events that occur in the work.
In this introduction, Shelley hearkens to the work of “Dr. Darwin, and some of the physiological
writers of Germany" (P. B. Shelley, “Preface” 5) as the inspiration for Frankenstein. This serves
a number of purposes that may seem standard, helpful or even protective on a first reading.
Attempting to establish a direct source for the seed of the idea that is grounded in reality is a
means of offsetting any future accusation of blasphemy or hedonism by the publishers and
reading audience. It also serves as a way of perhaps increasing the appeal and intrigue of the
novel. Similar to advertisement strategies of the horror movies of today, claiming basis on a true
story could add an extra alluring aspect to Frankenstein, allowing readers the possibility to
imagine the supernatural events of the novel actually occurring, in some form, in reality.
Another common method authors of the period would use to displace their own
authorship was to claim they had found an old manuscript by an unknown or completely obscure
author and had simply edited its contents for the public. Shelley does not quite use this method,
but the one he invokes is similar to a certain degree. Instead of referring to a specific text he
instead describes the following:
I shall not be supposed as according the remotest degree of serious faith to such
an imagination; yet, in assuming it as the basis of a work of fancy, I have not
considered myself as merely weaving a series of supernatural terrors. The event
on which the interest of the story depends is exempt from the disadvantages of a
mere tale of specters or enchantment. (P.B. Shelley, “Preface” 5)

35
Shelley, taking on the persona of the author of the text, here states that his own beliefs and
imaginations are nothing like those in the text. But this is not a complete abandonment of
creative responsibility. Shelley, states that the author has not simply put known, factual though
fanciful, puzzle pieces together to form a narrative, but has had more creative input than such a
process requires. The last sentence of the above passage also seems to suggest that because the
author has not only drawn from these outer sources, but also maintained an authority in its
creation, in writing, he has essentially created fact. Shelley cements this proposition with his
following statement, "I have thus endeavoured to preserve the truth of the elementary principles
of human nature, while I have not scrupled to innovate upon their combinations," (P.B. Shelley
5). At this point in the first edition's introduction, Shelley's prose seems to be in Mary Shelley's
favor - to attempt to protect her story and herself from the censor and the possible anger from the
readership. But as the introduction continues these efforts seem to go too far to displace the
authorship—and when one takes into consideration the fact that Shelley is writing this in Mary’s
stead, an almost sinister tone, or questions of an ulterior motive, comes to light.
After these previous attempts to support and even hype the factual quality to the
supernatural occurrences in the novel, Shelley curiously backtracks when it comes to the desired
effect this story will have on readers. Speaking again as the anonymous Mary Shelley he states:
I am by no means indifferent to the manner in which whatever moral tendencies
exist in the sentiments or characters it contains shall affect the reader; yet my
chief concern in this respect has been limited to the avoiding the enervating
effects of the novels of the present day, and to the exhibition of the amiableness of
domestic affection, and the excellence of universal virtue. (P.B. Shelley,
“Preface” 5)

36
The only way to describe the latter part of the above passage to say it is a lie. Shelley’s claim that
the contents of Frankenstein endeavors to dodge this believed moral affect novels had on their
readers is simply untrue. The only point in the novel where this “amiableness of domestic
affection, and the excellence of universal virtue” are at all on display is during the scenes where
the Monster secretly lives with the De Lacey family and learns language and the possibility of
human goodness. But even this scene works to completely oppose and strip domestic affection of
its amiableness when the Monster is callously driven away, yet again, by the only other humans
he has encountered, as we will see further discussed in chapter three. It is not certain if Shelley is
putting an emphasis on this domestic affection and universal virtue as a way of diverting the
publishers eyes and expectations in another effort to slip under the censor’s radar, or if there is
something else in the text that Shelley wishes to draw attention away from.
These reflections could be Shelley’s own suppositions of the text or at the very least, his
attempts to project this lens of reading the novel onto the readers’ experience. Universal virtue
and especially domestic amiability are two qualities that are primarily within the feminine sphere
of concerns, but considering the fact that at this point Frankenstein’s author’s gender is
unknown, it seems superfluous that such measures to assert that Mary was writing within the
acceptable subject matters of her sex were taken. This peculiarity is heightened as the passage
continues with:
The opinions which naturally spring from the character and the situation of the
hero are by no means to be conceived as existing always in my own conviction;
nor is any inference justly to be drawn from the following pages as prejudicing
any philosophical doctrine of whatever kind. (P.B. Shelley, “Preface” 6)

37
Here, Shelley, in place of Mary, explicitly declaims all responsibility for the authorship of the
ideas put forth in the novel. Though the author has penned the characters, situations, and events
of this novel, Shelley here asserts that any opinions or philosophies these characters may have
originate solely from the passive, process of writing them. He goes so far as, not simply to add a
disclaimer that the author, Mary Shelley, does not share the opinions of her characters, but to
state that said opinions never existed in her conscience. This passage goes further than to simply
act as a protective shield against possible moral criticism from the publishers and the readership.
Instead, it works to debase Mary Shelley's autonomy as the author. She is painted as simply a
means to the literary end, but not in the high, divine sense of the Eolian harp. Because of the
subject matter—the reanimated corpse that is the monster and the horrors that ensue—there is no
honor in being the passive vessel of poetic beauty. The strength and the insistence of this
language suggests a fear in Percy Shelley. What is it in Frankenstein that he so ardently desires
to disassociate with his wife? Attempting to answer this question will be one of the main focuses
of chapter three.
This analysis of the above passage as a personal attack by Shelley on his wife’s ability to
write and take ownership of the philosophies the novel puts forth may seem like an extreme
reading until Shelley gives his account of how the story of Frankenstein originated. Unlike
Mary’s own account of how the seed of Frankenstein was planted, which will be discussed later,
Shelley’s account is drab with little details of the scenario that brought the story about. He
recounts that, “two other friends (a tale from the pen of one of whom would be far more
acceptable to the public than anything I can ever hope to produce) and myself agreed to write
each a story, founded on some supernatural occurrence,” (P.B. Shelley, “Preface” 6). At the time
that Mary first began writing Frankenstein, she and Shelley were spending time with Lord Byron

38
in Switzerland, so the two other friends that Percy Shelley here asserts write infinitely better than
the author of Frankenstein must refer to none other than Lord Byron and Percy Shelley
himself.11 While this passage could easily be seen as an attempt to make the author seem humble
and therefore more likable to the readers, the fact that Shelley is referring to himself gives the
passage a cruel tone. Not only does he assert that Frankenstein is not up to caliber with either
Shelley or Lord Byron’s writings, but that nothing Mary Shelley ever writes could possibly hope
to compete with their work. This jape is cruel and unusual and is just a further attempt to debase
and even humiliate Mary Shelley.
Shelley’s introduction does less to inform or raise interest in the reader than it does paint
and alarmingly passive and insulting portrait of the author. This work to illegitimize Mary’s
prowess as an author, and in extension also works to debase the entire novel is the exact opposite
to the function of an introduction. But what is it in the novel that Percy is so apt to humiliate into
obscurity? Looking at Mary’s own introduction to the third edition of Frankenstein, published
after Percy’s death in 1831, helps begin to answer this question.
Mary Shelley’s Introduction to the 1831 edition:
Mary’s own introduction to her novel was not printed until the Standard Novels edition,
printed in 1831, and according to Mary, it is only because these publishers wished for another
account of how she, as a young girl, could have possibly thought of such a horrifying tale.12
Anne Kostelanetz Mellor, in her essay, “Revising Frankenstein,” posits that by the end of this

11

Holmes, Richard. “The Byron Summer: Switzerland 1816”. Shelley: The Pursuit. New York:
E. P. Dutton, 1975. Print. 330.
12
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Maurice Hindle. “Author’s Introduction to the Standard’s
Novel Edition”. Frankenstein, Or, The Modern Prometheus. London: Penguin, 2003.
Print. 5.

39
introduction, “Mary Shelley both disclaimed responsibility for her hideous progeny and insisted
that she had remained passive before it,” (Mellor 176), but as we will see, the exact opposite is
true. She begins this introduction with this statement that seems to suggest that she is writing the
introduction out of a feeling of necessity rather than actually wanting to. She reinforces this
implied sentiment when she states, “it is true that I am very averse to bringing myself forward in
print; but as my account will only appear as an appendage to a former production, and as it will
be confined to such topics as have connexion with my authorship alone, I can scarcely accuse
myself of a personal intrusion,” (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 5). Here, Mary is curiously at
once stating her willingness and unwillingness to come forward with personal details in print. By
stating her unease over speaking about herself but then complying to do so anyway, Mary is
almost peaking the reader’s curiosity. She is highlighting her personal experience instead of
obscuring it when she points out her aversion to come forward. This strategy allows Mary the
keep with her role of domestic coyness while still shedding light on her personal life. Even her
excuse that she will only be speaking of herself and her own authorship works in this favor
because, as we will see, it is not exactly a true statement.
Before really delving into the events of the summer of 1816 that lead to the creation of
Frankenstein Mary goes the much more personal route and speaks of her childhood in Scotland.
She begins by stating the perhaps obvious fact that she enjoyed writing at this time in her young
life, but interesting enough she does not emphasize writing as her passion. Instead she states,
“Still, I had a dearer pleasure than this, which was the formation of castles in the air – the
indulging in waking dreams – the following up trains of thought…my dreams were all my own; I
accounted for them to nobody they were my refuge when annoyed – my deepest pleasure when
free,” (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 5). Mary shares the deep and personal connection she had

40
with dreams when she was a young girl. This almost seems like a throwaway reference, simply
placed within this introduction to frame Mary’s life as a writer a bit. It is interesting, however,
that she explicitly states that she kept these dreams to herself and that they were her mode of
escapism. This aspect of the dreams is highlighted when Mary goes on to describe her earliest
writing when she says, “I could not figure to myself that romantic woes or wonderful events
would ever be my lot; but I was not confined to my own identity, and I could people the hours
with creations far more interesting to me at that age than my own sensations,” (M. W. Shelley,
“Introduction” 6). The idea of Mary not being confined to her own identity sounds incredibly
reminiscent of the subject Poet’s relationship with the anti-type as found in “Alastor,” but it is
not quite the same. Mary explicitly states that these imaginations are outside of herself almost to
escape her own identity. This is not the narcissistic projection of Shelley’s imaging, but it does
perhaps seem to be the first reference or nod to this philosophy.
The idea that her thoughts are of Percy Shelley’s work on the imagination and love
becomes clear when she immediately mentions him in the following paragraph. Once again,
Mary puts forth a statement that seems to undermine her own wish and will to write. She writes
that it was not herself who was eager to write, but Shelley:
My husband, however, was from the first, very anxious that I should prove myself
worthy of my parentage, and enrol myself on the page of fame. He was for ever
inciting me to obtain literary reputation, which even on my own part I cared for
then, though since I have become infinitely indifferent to it. At this time he
desired that I should write, not so much with the idea that I could produce
anything worthy of notice, but that he might himself judge how far I possessed the
promise of better things hereafter. (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 6)

41
This little anecdote from Mary about her and Shelley’s relationship with her writing is
reminiscent of the attitudes found in the preface to the first edition. Shelley seems to be both
encouraging Mary to write but not exactly confident in her abilities. In the preface, Shelley’s
condescending tone may have been an attempt to paint the author of Frankenstein as being
humble, as well as a jab at Mary’s talent. Mary may be echoing this desired humbling impact
except that this condescension is not in her voice, she is merely retelling the opinion of her
husband. Instead of simply echoing the sentiments of her husband preface this gives the effect of
a more direct reference to it, as if she is telling the reader that she was aware of Shelley’s perhaps
less than supportive views towards her talent. This subtle glance of Mary’s recognition of trouble
in her personal life with Shelley is only the first example.
After this beginning part of the introduction, explaining how and why Mary first began
writing, she starts to recall the details of the origin of Frankenstein herself. She sets the scene for
the reader, explaining how she and Shelley were visiting Lord Byron that summer in Switzerland
but how the rain kept them indoors. To entertain themselves, they resorted to books. Mary
describes one volume in particular:
There was the History of the Inconstant Lover, who, when he thought to clasp the
bride to whom he had pledged his vows, he found himself in the arms of the pale
ghost of her whom he had deserted. There was the tale of the sinful founder of his
race whose miserable doom it was to bestow the kiss of death on all the younger
sons of the fated house, just when they reached the age of promise. (M. W.
Shelley, “Introduction” 7)
This reference to this collection of ghost stories may have actually been one of the volumes that
Mary, Percy, Byron, and the rest of their company read from that summer, but Mary must have

42
chosen this volume carefully as yet another method to subtly draw the reader’s attention to her
and Shelley’s personal lives. The immediate clue to this, is the title of the volume itself which
brings Percy Shelley to mind. Mary already knew that Shelley was not concrete in his affections,
as he left his pregnant wife, Harriet, to run off with Mary. But Harriet was not Mary’s only
possible rival for Shelley’s love, her step-sister Claire Clairmont was also tangled up in Shelley’s
affairs. Holmes even goes so far as to state that Claire’s role in Shelley and Mary’s relationship,
“provided the element of dark, unstable, tempestuous affection that his calm union with Mary
required to keep it alive; and that this ‘shadow’ love occasionally—at moments of crisis—
achieved violent sexual expression,” (Holmes, “First Love” 39).
There is evidence in abundance that Percy Shelley was certainly an inconstant lover but it
is not until the description of the story that this reference to him solidifies. The horror story of
the man embracing his new wife only to grasp the intangible ghost of her former lover is eerily
reminiscent of the scene of the veiled maid in “Alastor,” discussed at length in chapter one. But
this scene is even more reminiscent of Shelley personally because Mary mirrors the scene from
“Alastor” but adds the details of Shelley’s own relationships. The second story Mary references
also seems to mirror her and Shelley’s life together, though perhaps to a lesser degree than the
first example. The head of house whose children are doomed to an early death also sounds like a
reference to Shelley because he and Mary’s children’s unfortunate fates. A year before writing
Frankenstein Mary’s first child by Shelley, a daughter, dies a few days after her premature birth.
Clara, their third child, dies at about a year old, and only a year after that, their second child,
William also dies. Only their last son, Percy Florence, survives to adulthood, all their other

43
children die while still very young.13 This similarity between these two supposed German ghost
stories and the personal details from both Shelley’s work and personal lives strikes a chord too
eerie to be unintentional. By including these stories that also served as the inspiration to write her
own story of horror, Mary is giving the reader a subtle clue to the fact that Frankenstein was
written with Shelley and his works in mind.
Mary’s description of the Switzerland summer continues and we come to Lord Byron’s
proposition that they each write a ghost story. She goes out of her way to mention that there were
four people present at this gathering, including Polidori, though Shelley neglected to mention
him in the original preface. As she briefly describes each of the ghost stories the participants of
the challenge imagined we have a description of Shelley’s attempt, saying he was “more apt to
embody ideas and sentiments in the radiance of brilliant imagery, and in the music of the most
melodious verse that adorns our language, than to invent the machinery of a story, commenced
one founded on the experiences of his early life,” (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 7). Mary’s
depiction of Shelley’s story, although praising his mastery over descriptive language, is at the
same time, adding a little twist of an insult, suggesting he does not have a fantastic grip over
narrative. This is very similar to how Shelley, in his preface, questions Mary’s abilities. Also,
Mary once again brings up the idea of basing a story off of one’s own experience, priming the
reader with this idea that this practice was not uncommon in their work.
As Mary’s narrative of the origin of her most famous work continues she recounts the
initial difficulty she had with thinking of a story. Preoccupied with the wish to rival the
horrendous impact the ghost stories had on others with a work of her own, all of her initial
thoughts are in vain, as she describes, she “felt that blank incapability of invention which is the
13

Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Maurice Hindle. “Chronology”. Frankenstein, Or, The
Modern Prometheus. London: Penguin, 2003. Print. viii.

44
greatest misery of authorship, when dull Nothing replies to our anxious invocations,” (M. W.
Shelley, “Introduction” 8). In other words, Mary suffered from a severe case of writer’s block.
She continues to ruminate on the endeavor of writing when she interestingly posit the following
theory, that, “invention…does not consist in creating out of void, but out of chaos; the materials
must, in the first place, be afforded: it can give form to dark, shapeless substances, but cannot
bring into being the substance itself,” (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 8). What Mary is here
admitting to is that writing does not come from nothing, it is more about taking different
elements that are already in existence and reforming them to create something new, the story.
Percy Shelley’s preface put forth a similar idea, but that was more for the protection from
possible accusations of blaspheme. By the time Mary had written her introduction Frankenstein
had already been in print for over ten years and it would not be necessary for her to state this idea
in the hopes of self-preservation. So, this admission, too, seems to point to the Mary putting the
seed in the reader’s mind that her work has at least, in part, been based off of previous events.
This is also emphasized by the fact that Mary follows this paragraph by describing how she first
got her inspiration for Frankenstein. She says, “many and long were the conversations between
Lord Byron and Shelley, to which I was a devout but nearly silent listener…They talked of the
experiments by Dr. Darwin…who preserved a piece of vermicelli in a glass case, till by some
extraordinary means it began to move with voluntary motion,” (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction”
8). Mary then goes on to talk about how this one incident discussed between the three of them
(she does stress that she is a nearly silent listener) began her thoughts on the possibility of
reanimation of a corpse.
Mary, like Shelley’s preface, seems to have put the agency of her ideas and writing
outside of herself. But instead of being an insult to herself or an effort to stay humble, it reads

45
more as a way to illustrate her writing Frankenstein as both inspired by and in response to real
incidents in her and Shelley’s lives together. This displacement of agency continues as she
describes the way her now fabled dream came into her conscience, her, “imagination, unbidden,
possessed and guided me, gifting the successive images that arose in my mind with a vividness
far beyond the usual bounds of reverie,” (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 9). Here, there is no
agency on Mary’s part, all of the following images of Victor at his creation’s side from the
dream seem to be entirely outside of any control on Mary’s part. But she does not simply rob
herself of all credit to the degree Shelley does in his preface, when she awakes the next morning
and announces to the rest of her party that “I had thought of a story,” (M. W. Shelley,
“Introduction” 10). Although Mary initially presented her inspiration as having come from a
source entirely outside of herself, she recognizes her dreams as a part of her conscious, when she
declares that she thought of a story she takes ownership over her narrative and begins the writing
process later that same day.
Mary’s assertion of her own agency in the creation of Frankenstein continues as she
describes the novel’s development into the form as we know it today. The tale begins as simply
that a tale, but:
Shelley urged me to develop the idea at greater length. I certainly did not owe the
suggestion of one incident, not scarcely of one train of feeling, to my husband,
and yet but for this incitement it would never have taken the form in which it was
presented to the world. From this declaration I must except the preface. As far as I
can recollect, it was entirely written by him. (M. W. Shelley, “Introduction” 10)
Mary declares in language stripped of any qualifiers that she is the sole person behind the writing
and the content of Frankenstein, and that she owes little to her husband save his insistence that

46
she develop the work into a longer form. She also here asserts his composition of the preface that
appeared in the first edition. But this insistence of her independence from Shelley is interesting,
because the strength of her language, that she does not owe scarcely one trains of feeling to
Shelley seems to come into conflict with her narrative up to this point and indeed how she
decides to end the introduction. Just earlier in the text, she speaks of how Shelley and Lord
Byron’s conversations about the work of Dr. Darwin are what perhaps gave rise to her dream in
the first place. This strength of language is similar to Shelley’s insistence in the preface of
“Alastor” that asserts his opposition to the ideals of narcissistic love explored in the text of the
poem itself, as well as his separation from the narrator. But just as in Shelley’s work, here this
insistence gives the same opposite effect, leading the reader to question the truth of such a
statement.
The reader’s questions are in fact answered, though implicitly, from the closing of the
introduction. Mary has told the tale of how her hideous monster came into creation in her
imagination and how the pages of the novel were brought to life. She then reflects on her
personal feelings towards her famous work when she writes:
And now, once again, I bid my hideous progeny go forth and prosper. I have
affection for it, for it was the offspring of happy days, when death and grief were
but words, which found no true echo in my heart. Its several pages speak of many
a walk, many a drive, and many a conversation, when I was not alone; and my
companion was one who, in this world, I shall never see more. But this is for
myself; my readers have nothing to do with these associations. (M. W. Shelley,
“Introduction” 10)

47
In almost complete contradiction to her strict statement that Shelley was not responsible for any
part of Frankenstein she speaks fondly of him, reminiscing of their time together before his death
nine years previous to Mary writing this introduction. In this recollection of memories, of a time
before her life has been racked with death and misfortune, she specifically references the fact
that this novel reflects the many discussions between her and her husband. As Holmes points, at
the time that Shelley was writing “Alastor,” only shortly before Mary begins Frankenstein,
“almost everything he wrote…would have been shown to Mary, and probably to Claire also; and
discussed at length,” (Holmes, “Second Marriage” 65). These discussions Mary refers to
inevitably included “Alastor” and his ideas of anti-typical love. The manner in which she speaks
of these conversations and the way they manifest in Frankenstein almost sounds like she’s
suggesting the work is continuing the discussion between her and Shelley. The novel “speaks” it
is an active participant. Just as “Alastor” was a continuation of the exploration of the anti-type
found in “On Love,” Frankenstein is a continuation or a response to these conversations. But
Mary does not explicitly put this idea forward, ending the paragraph almost chastising the reader
for attempting to peak into her life, claiming that these references within the text are for her only.
Of course, just as before, this insistence actually only primes the reader more so, to look into the
text for these details.
Percy Shelley’s preface written anonymously for the first edition, once it comes to light
that it is he writing it, almost comes off as an insult to Mary and a way to cleverly compliment
himself and Lord Byron. But this, like Mary’s own jab at Shelley’s inability to imagine creative
plots, this may just be a playful jest. What is more sinister in his preface is the repeated attempts
to displace the content and philosophies of the text of Frankenstein away from the thoughts and
feelings of the author. The reasons for Shelley’s exasperated efforts for this separation become

48
clearer once Mary’s own introduction is published in the 1831 Standard’s Edition. In this
introduction, despite a denial that Shelley had any influence on the writing of Frankenstein, she
still draws a direct correlation between it and the many discussions her and her husband would
share. Of the many topics the young lovers would have talked about, Shelley’s own work would
have been among them, and of that body of work, “On Love” and “Alastor” surely would have
been discussed between the two of them. The ideas found in these two works by Shelley,
manifest in Frankenstein as well, although to a very different conclusion which will be discussed
at length in chapter three. It is this exploration on Mary’s part that Percy seems to want to draw
attention to. Eventually, however, his efforts fail when Mary’s own introduction is published.
Instead of drawing our attention away from examining the philosophical beliefs and personal ties
in the book, Mary subtly, out of continued love and respect for Shelley, encourages her reader to
discover them.

49
Chapter III:
Frankenstein: The Anti Anti-Type Response to “Alastor”
Frankenstein, one of the most famous pieces of horror fiction ever written, the origin of
perhaps one of the most recognizable icons of frightening cinema and Halloween merchandise,
was written by Mary Shelley when she was only nineteen years old. This feat alone, the shear
wake of influence this one piece of literature has had on all sorts of different media, would be
enough to leave one impressed, but there is so much more to the novel than its legacy. While
Mary Shelley’s innovations on the hideous stuff of nightmares certainly are impressive in their
own right, the novel’s deeper examinations of the many relationships and philosophical ideals it
holds are where one can find its true literary credit. But this is unsurprising, given Mary’s literary
origins and surroundings, as the daughter to William Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft, future
friend to Lord Byron and wife to Percy Shelley. It is this last figure, Percy Shelley, who played
the largest role in the formation of Frankenstein. Specifically, his second long poem “Alastor”
written not long after he and Mary met and ran away together. Richard Holmes, goes so far as to
suggest that the evil spirit which pursues the subject Poet of “Alastor” influenced Frankenstein
to the point that “ the monster sometimes seems to be an almost programmatic attempt to present
the kaka-daimon of Shelley’s poem, the evil spirit of solitude itself,” (Holmes, “Byron Summer”
332). But this statement seems extreme or at the least perhaps a bit misguiding. Instead, this
chapter will propose not that Mary was heavily influenced by this work, but that she wrote
Frankenstein as a response. In essence, just as “Alastor” was a means for Shelley to explore
further his ideals of self-center love, Mary used Frankenstein as her own thought experiment,
critiquing a specific aspect of the ideal of the anti-type, extreme obsession and isolation. This
manifests in the development of Victor’s relationship with his wretched creation. This

50
relationship possesses much more than a simple father – son or the more Godlike, creator –
created, dynamic, but instead forms a conceit throughout the novel concerning the relationship
between the idealist and the idealized. Instead of the mourning that comes in Shelley’s “Alastor,”
Mary’s novel portrays a much more critical view of Shelley’s philosophies, reflecting perhaps
her own personal opposition to them.
Walton, the First Mad Scientist?
Interestingly, the novel opens immediately not with Victor Frankenstein’s narrative, but
with letters from an Arctic explorer named Walton. He, in his own isolating pursuit of the
unknown which somewhat mirrors Frankenstein’s later narrative, stumbles across a great sight
on his adventures. Just when hope seems lost in the wilds of the ice, the crew spots a sled led by
a many of gigantic stature who soon disappears into the horizon. It is not long after this initial
sighting that another figure is spotted, a figure in much more dire circumstances. Walton and his
crew haul the man on board and describes him thusly:
I never saw a man in so wretched condition…We accordingly brought him back
to the deck, and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and
forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as he showed signs of life, we
wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen stove.
By slow degrees he recovered, and ate a little soup which restored him
wonderfully. (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 26-27)
As readers this is the one of the first descriptions we have of Victor Frankenstein and one of the
first adjectives used is “wretched,” the very word that Frankenstein immediately assigns to his
creation once it begins to stir with life and continues to use to refer to him as the narrative
continues. Right at our first encounter with Victor, we are being trained to associate these words

51
with both Victor and his monster. This first word is the clue and the crucible that leads to the
reader’s further recognition of these first views of Victor as equating him to his creation. The
passage continues with Walton’s attempt to rescue Frankenstein from his condition of poor
health, but Mary Shelley is very careful about her prose in this passage. Walton does not merely
describe Victor as slowly regaining his health but by being “restored to animation.” This
language is the same as that used by Frankenstein when he first begins his quest to discover the
secret to life—he does not merely wish to create life but to restore it to dead matter. Walton,
essentially shadows Victor’s future actions, Victor is undergoing the same process and described
in the same language as his creation. The possibility of this use of such a specific description as
being a coincidence is undermined by the repetition of similar language as the passage continues.
Victor shows “signs of life” and “restored’ is repeated. Something that is interesting to take into
consideration when reading the above passage is the fact that the letters Walton is writing to his
sister are supposedly happening in real time, in other words, that Walton is writing these letters
in succession very shortly after the events which they are describing. This is important to
remember when analyzing the above passage because it eliminates the possibility that Walton’s
descriptive language has been tainted by that of Frankenstein in his retelling of the events of his
life.
This initial description of Frankenstein continues and as he is fully restored by Walton,
his fully living state is also seen to be similar to that of the monster:
Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak…I never saw a more
interesting creature; his eyes have generally an expression of wildness, and even
madness, but there are moments when…his whole countenance is lighted up, as it
were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he

52
is generally melancholy and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes his teeth; as if
impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him. (M. W. Shelley Frankenstein
26)
As Walton continues to describe Frankenstein as he continues to recover, next choosing the word
“creature” to describe him. Again, this is the same exact language that Victor uses to label his
creation. Victor has only been referred to as a man once in this passage at the very beginning,
giving the reader the effect that as he recovers, as he is “restored to animation,” he becomes
more and more like his creation in the descriptions. It is also interesting that right after Walton
refers to Victor as creature he remarks on the expression of emotion given off by Frankenstein’s
eyes. He describes them as having a “wildness, and even a madness.” It is these qualities about
the monster’s great yellow eyes that truly frighten Victor as the monster begins to stir and causes
him to flee from his creation. One could even argue that the benevolence that Walton detects in
Victor makes him even more akin to his creature. Although Frankenstein immediately labels the
creature as a monster and disregards any of the creature’s attempts to change his judgment, the
reader learns of the creature’s initially kind nature through his narrative of his time with the
DeLacey family. It was only the actions of others convinced him to become what Victor had
labeled him as. In truth, both Victor and his creature are characters torn between “sweetness” and
“despairing.” Again, these descriptions of Frankenstein are of Walton’s own language, a
character that has not met the creature and has yet to hear of his existence. He lacks the
knowledge of this shared language to describe both Frankenstein and his creation, which adds a
certain eerie element of truth to the idea that at the very start of the narrative, when we as readers
first meet Victor Frankenstein, he is already one and the same with his monster. At the very start
of the novel we as readers are primed to draw these conclusions, and though this is a horrifying

53
idea in itself, this is not the true revelation of the text. It instead primes the reader to explore how
this dualistic relationship came about.
The Early Academic Obsession and Creation
Before we can see what effect Frankenstein and his monster’s relationship have on the
two of them and how it acts as a response to Shelley’s exploration of the ideas, we must first see
what drove Frankenstein to create the monster. From the time he was a young child, Victor
describes his obsession with debunked or parascientific pursuits. He describes this need,
however, in negative terms:
I felt as if my soul were grapping with a palpable enemy; one by one the various
keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being: chord after chord
was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception, one
purpose…I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the
world the deepest mysteries of creation. (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 49)
The physicality to this description of his desire to achieve more, how deeply this need penetrated
his body as well as his spirit, and his naming it the enemy foreshadow his actual rivalry with the
physical being he creates. Merely having the thought to pursue such an intellectual journey
already shows dooming relationship between the idealist and his idealizations. The sense of
doom is emphasized when Victor later describes this need as being “a resistless, and almost
frantic impulse, urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one
pursuit,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 55). This is highly reminiscent of the language Shelley
uses as his subject Poet persists in his fruitless pursuit of his own creation, the veiled maid.
Victor, like the subject Poet, has driven himself into isolation, consumed by his need to achieve
his ideal. Mary is establishing this connection before the monster is even created because unlike

54
the subject Poet, Frankenstein does, in some sense, achieve his lofty goals, but this pursuit and
capture, as Mary shows, has disastrous consequences for both creator and created.
Victor has worked tirelessly to form his being, blasting moral asides, plundering graves
for materials, and daring to match God in the ability to bestow life. But on the faithful night
where his creation is finally ready to receive the actual spark that will reanimate his lifeless
limbs, Frankenstein describes his horror of his creature’s first moments of being alive, “I saw the
dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom with
such infinite pains and care I had endeavored to form?” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 58). It is
interesting that it is not until the creature actually has life within him that Frankenstein recoils
back and, for the first time, truly sees the grotesque nature of his work. Though in retrospect,
Victor has described his need to create in negative terms, this was not recognized until the
moment the monster opens his eyes. Mary is pointing out the blindness of the idealist and the
isolationist, who so entranced in their own pursuits fail to see how it hurts those around them or
themselves. It is almost as if when the creature opens his eyes, Victor opens his own as well,
further drawing the two characters together. This sudden and complete hatred for his action is
then transferred onto the result of that action, the creature itself. Victor continues to describe his
first real look at his living creation:
I beheld the wretch – the miserable creature whom I had created. He held up the
curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me. His
jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his
cheeks. He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was stretched out,

55
seemingly to detain me, but I escaped, and rushed downstairs. (M. W. Shelley,
Frankenstein 59)
Without Victor’s newfound lens that casts light on the grotesquerie his laboratory has become
these initial actions by the creature would necessarily come off as so ill-intentioned as Victor
perceives them. It makes sense, like a bird first hatching, that the newborn monster would fix his
eyes upon his father figure, and the same goes for when he reaches out for his creator. But
Victor’s horror at himself is displaced and he now views instead his creature as the manifestation
of his sins. In a bizarre twist of Shelley’s “Alastor” Victor does not project his love onto the
monster but his hatred, ironically binding the two irrevocably although Frankenstein wishes to
escape. This correlation between Victor and the subject Poet becomes more clear when Victor
laments, “Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been
my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a hell to me; and the change was
so rapid, the overthrow so complete!” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 59-60). Just as when the
subject Poet awakes from his fevered erotic dream of the veiled maid, so too does Frankenstein’s
dream of a perfect created life form abruptly vanish upon this metaphoric awakening. What was
once sustaining becomes a hellish understanding of the unattainable nature of such a goal and
results in the mental torture and eventual deaths of both protagonists of their respective works.
Victor eerily prophesizes this himself when he later states, “I foresaw obscurely that I was
destined to become the most wretched of human beings,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 76).
Wandering Kindred Spirits
What follows Frankenstein’s abandonment of his creation is a long path of paranoia
about what horrible acts his creature must commit and the unfortunate confirmation of Victor’s
fears. His younger brother William, a mere child, is found strangled and the poor caretaker

56
Justine is blamed and subsequently tried and executed for his murder. Frankenstein, somehow
aware that the true perpetrator of his crime is his own monster, grieves and separates himself
from his family. The guilt of his actions haunt him and as he describes, he “wandered like an evil
spirit, for [he] had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much
more ([he] had persuaded [him]self) was yet behind,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 93). This
explicit mention of the evil spirit is a direct reference to “Alastor” and is likely why Holmes
believed Frankenstein to be a “programmatic” attempt to flesh this idea out more fully.
However, unlike Shelley who does not explicitly state the relationship between pursued and
pursuing spirit, Mary makes the correlation clear. How Frankenstein weighs how to deal with
such a spirit also resonates with “Alastor” when he puts forth, “often, I say, I was tempted to
plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities forever,” (M.
W. Shelley, Frankenstein 94). Victor, like the subject Poet, feels compelled to end his own life,
and interestingly Mary uses the passive voice in the verb “tempted.” It is unclear wheather, like
the subject Poet of “Alastor” there is the sense of an outer agent taunting him to his death or if
this is entirely Victor’s initiative.
Shortly after Victor describes feeling the impulse to commit suicide, the ambiguity of the
sense of pursued and pursued, tempted and tempter, becomes further stressed when Frankenstein
seems to wish to give up his life again and cries out, “wandering spirits, if indeed yet wander,
and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your
companion, away from the joys of life,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 101). Here, Victor
explicitly calls upon his kindred spirits, wandering with him though seemingly with the authority
to allow or prevent his exit from this world. To complicate matters further, immediately upon
uttering this statement, Victor notices, “as I said this, I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at

57
some distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein
101). In one sense, Frankenstein gets his wish. He evokes the wandering spirits and at that
instance his creature, a fellow wretched wanderer, appears. But this coincidence has another
interesting effect as it again links the two beings together, not only in that now they seem to be
almost sharing the same thoughts, but their fates are combined and their roles almost reversed.
Frankenstein had called upon the spirit asking permission to take leave of this world, extinguish
his life, and the monster, whom Victor had given life, enters the scene to take claim over that
responsibility. But the monster does not grant any lucky untimely death upon Victor and instead
begins to narrate his own life of abandonment.
The monster begins his narrative of his life after Victor’s cruel flight from the laboratory,
recounting his struggle to survive in the woods, gaining sustenance from nuts and berry, facing
the winter winds without shelter. That is until he comes upon a small cottage who we learn is
inhabited by the DeLacey family. Yearning for companionship the creature, to an obsessive
degree almost mirroring his creator’s, strives to learn their language. He hopes that “knowledge
might enable [him] to make them overlook the deformity of [his] figure; for with this also the
contrast perpetually presented to [his] eyes has made [him] acquainted,” (M. W. Shelley,
Frankenstein 116). Like Victor, he somehow has an early grasp, or perhaps exaggeration, of the
power of knowledge. But, also like Frankenstein, he understands that not all knowledge is
helpful even if it is enticing. For instance, he soon goes on to describe his love for the family:
‘I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers – their grace, beauty, and
delicate complexions: but how was I terrified, when I viewed myself in a
transparent pool! At first I stared back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who
was reflected in the mirror; and when I became fully convinced that I was in

58
reality the monster that I am, I was filled with the bitterest of sensations of
despondence and mortifications. Alas! I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects
of this miserable deformity.’ (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 116-117)
This, too, is reminiscent of a scene from “Alastor” where the subject Poet for the first time
remarks at his haggard visage in the pool. But unlike “Alastor” this is not an inversion of the
Narcissus and Echo myth, nor does the language surrounding the monster’s deformity serve to
romanticize an ugly appearance from the tireless pursuit of the ideal. There is no fawning Echo
and no self-love present in this scene, only hatred for the knowledge of his hideous form.
The monster’s narrative continues to mirror Victor as he becomes more and more
knowledgeable through his observation of the family and the different texts he has found and
read to himself. He becomes more self-aware and begins to question the nature of his existence
and the knowledge he possesses. He exclaims, “Of what a strange nature if knowledge! It clings
to the mind, when it has once seized on it, like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to shake
off all thought and feeling; but I learned that there was but one means to overcome the sensation
of pain, and that was death – a state which I feared yet did not understand,” (M. W. Shelley,
Frankenstein 123). The monster, too, has contemplated the taking of his own life to escape the
burden of the knowledge he possesses, in this case, the knowledge of his own hideous existence.
A few pages later, the monster expands on this recognition, saying “increase of knowledge only
discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I cherished hope, it is true; but it
vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water, or my shadow in the moonshine, even as
that frail image and that inconstant shade,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 133). After the
DeLacey’s rejection of the creature his mind takes a dark turn.The monster’s knowledge, though
perhaps not directly, is responsible for his recognition of his isolation, similar to how Victor’

59
pursuit of knowledge leads to his solitude. But just as in “Alastor,” when the monster views his
disfigured visage in the clear pool of water he gives up his hopes. He does not resign himself to
lie down and die like the subject Poet, at least not at this point in the narrative, but in a way is he
resigned a sort of death, the cold realization he must carry on alone.
Creating Companionship and Chaos
But the monster has not yet completely accepted this fate of a doomed existence to walk
the earth alone, scorned by all other living beings, including those who are responsible for his
being and those who he has shown only love and reverence. In return for the wrongs his master
has done against him, the monster searched for Frankenstein until he found him and began to
relate his tale. At the end of his narrative, which Victor fails to see mirrors his own, the creature
demands that Frankenstein construct another being like him, this time a female. The creature
states:
I demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is
small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they will be harmless,
and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! my creator, make me happy; let me feel
gratitude towards you for one benefit! (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 148)
Though this is not an entirely hopeful solution, the creature promises that he and his newly
created companion, will run away together and live in isolation away from the hate-filled eyes of
humans, bound together through their mutual loneliness caused by a shared hideous exterior.
Regardless of his female companion, the reality of their isolation is still a dismal prospect.

60
At first, Victor is appalled by the idea, fearing that the creatures’ combined power would
serve to incite them to attack and wreck havoc upon the human race. But after a thought,
however a reluctant thought it is, Frankenstein begrudgingly agrees, feelings his fatherly duty
towards his creation for the first time. With the creature’s promise of destruction upon all that
Frankenstein loves, the young doctor leaves to undertake his gruesome galvanizing task once
again. He then isolates himself once again, especially from his family, which creates a heavy
burden in him by itself. He describes it as:
I felt as if I were placed under a ban – as if I had no right to claim their
sympathies – as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet thus I
loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate myself to my
most abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation made every other
circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream, and that thought only had
to me the reality of life. (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 151)
In an interesting twist, in resolving to create a companion for the monster Frankenstein here also
resolves to eliminate the possibility of himself having one, at least for the time being. There is
also an interesting reversion to the language of dreams in describing his work, but it is inverted.
Before, when all of Victor’s dreams rested on his success at attempting to instill life in what was
dead, now his work has become a nightmare and all other aspects of life are the dream. But as we
already know from past experience, both in this novel and the poem “Alastor” that came before
it, what you dream is doomed to be that which is unattainable.
This resolve of Frankenstein to bring to life a female to serve as the companion to his
earlier creation is short-lived. Victor delays the process of building the creature out of dread and
as he delves deeper and deeper back into the science he forsook his promise violently dissolves

61
into a paranoid fear. As the monster himself promised, he comes to check Victor’s progress in
his second endeavor, when Victor sees him at the window, he reflects:
I trembled, and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, I saw by the light
of the moon, the daemon at the casement. A ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he
gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted to me. Yes, he
had followed me in my travels; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or
taken refuge in wide and desert hearths; and he now came to mark my progress,
and claim the fulfillment of my promise. (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 171)
As the passage begins, Victor describes the effect the mere sight of his creation has on him. His
heart “fails” within him, not only interjecting his great fear of his creature but also his likeness to
it and the half-formed companion he is striving to animate. Thought and sight of the creature
creates a feeling of death, of inanimation, within Victor. In this moment, Victor reduces himself
to the same dead flesh of the creature and the future companion. Victor then continues to
describe the creature in the same monstrous language that he has since the spark of life first
flowed through his creation, with “daemon,” the “ghastly” grin, but if the reader takes into
consideration Victor’s language of equality between himself and the creature at the very
beginning of the passage, then the reader must also make the conclusion that Victor is also
describing himself.
This intimacy of likening himself bodily with the monster through language transforms
into an even stronger bond as the passage continues. Through a mere glance, Victor has come,
not only to the conclusion that the creature must have followed him, but also to intimate
knowledge of specific details of the monster’s whereabouts and methods of tracking. Though this
could be mere speculation based off of the creature’s previous discussions with Victor, the tone

62
of his language is too repetitious and insistent. With the earlier language of connection between
Frankenstein and his monster, this is too specific a description to pose as mere conjecture on
Victor’s part. Now, at this literal meeting between the two characters, not only are their bodily
descriptions constructed to suggest similarity, but also their minds are open to a fluidity of
identity.
The fluidity culminates as the passage goes on:
As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and
treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating
another like to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which
I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence
he depended for happiness, and, with a howl of devilish despair and revenge,
withdrew. (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 171)
Victor continues to describe his creation’s expression with language of absolute disgust, with
“malice” and “treachery.” Once again we as readers can apply these descriptors to Victor himself
because at this moment, Frankenstein describes himself as being overcome by a “madness.” His
perceived evil descriptors of the monster manifest themselves in his mind and produce this
madness which in turn produces the monstrous behavior of destroying the companion, an act he
would normally reserve as only able to be enacted by the creature. But this act of destroying the
creature’s companion is not just the result of the two minds and bodies of Frankenstein and his
creature becoming more and more similar but is yet another act that emphasizes their soon to be
interchangeability. The conclusion of the passage reaches a disturbing level not simply because
of the act of destroying the companion but the manner in which Victor does it. He describes
himself as “trembling with passion” and in the heat of that passion physically tears to pieces of

63
corpse of pieces. This language is not only violent but is also subversively sexual. This effect is
strengthened when the reader takes into consideration Victor’s position around the thing. He is
standing over it, “engaged on” it. Most strikingly, though, at this point the reader is prepped to
view Victor and his creation as similar—the reader is already aware of the monster’s intentions
to have the female as a companion and that intimacy is one of his desires. If we take the
monster’s wishes and wants to also be Victor’s as the language suggests, than Victor has in
essence fulfilled his greatest fear and consummated the creature’s and his companion’s union in
the creature’s stead.
This mirroring between the monster and Frankenstein is, of course, brought to a head
once the monster return’s the favor and murders Elizabeth on her and Victor’s wedding night.
The monster rages once he sees what Victor has done to his promise of companionship and
threatens outright before he flees from the laboratory, “I shall be with you on your weddingnight,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 173). But Frankenstein, mistakenly takes this threat to be
against his own person and neglects to take Elizabeth’s safety into account, an oversight which
leads to devastating consequences. Every precaution goes to waste and as Frankenstein
contemplates false hopes that the monster will not deliver on his promises when “I heard a shrill
and dreadful scream…As I heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood trickling in my veins,
and tingling the extremities of my limbs,” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 199). As Elizabeth’s
peril comes into Victor’s consciousness he becomes hyper aware of his corporeal nature. There
is almost a contradiction of terms, his life is at once suspended but he also feels his blood
running through his body, Elizabeth’s death has thrown him into an ambiguous state.

64
Because Victor mistook himself to be the victim of the monster’s plot, it seems the is a
transfer between the two of the descriptive language. The passage continues:
Great God! why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the destruction of
the best hope, and the purest creature of earth? She was there, lifeless and
inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down, and her pale and
distorted features half covered by her hair. Every where I turn I see the same
figure – her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal
bier. Could I behold this, and live? Alas! life is obstinate, and clings closest where
it is most hated.” (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein 199).
He is unable to become more like his creation at this point and instead that tragedy falls into
Elizabeth’s fate. Now she becomes “lifeless,” “inanimate,” and “distorted” like the monster but
more importantly like the female companion which Frankenstein had ripped apart. This horrific
death replaces the sexual climax one would expect on a marriage bed. Yet this can only be what
is expected. Throughout the novel, similar to the subject Poet’s continued refusal of women of
the flesh, Frankenstein forgoes his union with Elizabeth in favor of his ardent pursuit of that
which he idealizes. But instead of the portended horrors Shelley claims his poem will illuminate,
Mary Shelley’s novel becomes a truly nightmarish exploration of the mental and emotional
consequences of such an endeavor. In place of sexual climax, the dramatic climax of the novel is
reached and as Holmes observes, “thus both creator and created destroy each other’s hopes of
sexual happiness, and with that their links with human society are shattered. Both become
outcasts and pariahs, tortured equally by the knowledge of what they have done, and the desire to
be revenged for what they have lost,” (Holmes, “The Byron Summer” 333). While this is
certainly true, it can also be said that their ostracism is not only a result of this encounter but also

65
the cause of it. Mary is warning us not only of the dangers of unfulfilled romantic and sexual
desires, but that the obsessive and self-centered behavior that both Victor and his creation
participate in prevents a union from occurring in the first place.
The Final Chase
The death of Elizabeth is the last blow against any chance of Frankenstein going on to
live a life of satisfaction and also quenches any inkling that he and the monster could ever be
reconciled. Her death also marks the point in the narrative where Victor and his creation truly
become inseparable. He reflects:
As the memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their
cause – the monster whom I had created, the miserable daemon whom I had sent
abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a maddening rage
when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might have him
within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. (M. W.
Shelley, Frankenstein 202).
Frankenstein, in both descriptive language and thought, now mimics the monster’s previous
actions, he wishes to tear him apart just as he did his companion, just as the creature did to
Elizabeth. Although it seems all of his rage if directed at the monster, there is the clue that this
hatred points inwards as well because he names himself the creator. This is not the first time
Victor has taken blame for the events of the novel, but it is one of the first times that it induces
such a rage and violent nature in him instead of depression or melancholy. Victor has finally
found his resolve to pursue and destroy the monster which brings us back to the beginning of the
novel.

66
Holmes marks this as being extremely innovative on Mary’s part, remarking, “the way in
which, after the murder of Elizabeth, she reverses the roles of pursuer and pursued. It is now
Frankenstein who pursues the monster. This creates a doppelganger theme, in which
Frankenstein and his creation are made to form antagonistic parts of a single spiritual entity,”
(Holmes, “The Byron Summer” 332). But here Holmes neglects the fact that this doppelganger
effect has been present for the whole of the novel, yes the roles are reversed, but this has the
effect of solidifying a relationship that Mary has carefully crafted throughout the narrative. This
doppelganger effect is less about doubling the characters and more about confusing them, as
Victor reflect near his final moments of life:
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature, and was bound
towards him, to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and well-being.
This was my duty; but there was another still paramount to that. My duties
towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to my attention because
they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. (M. W. Shelley,
Frankenstein 219).
The first sentence of the above passage seems like an oxymoron, Frankenstein here admits that it
was madness that led to him create life and also admits that the creature was rational. There is at
once a recognition of his creature but also a confusion between himself and the monster in his
syntax. He then attempts to justify his actions, calling attention to his membership in the human
race. But this fails, due to his near constant identification with the monster and his self-induced
separation from humanity for most of his life. The statement just does not ring true and instead
reflects his self-centeredness more so as he attempts to displace his blame.

67
Near minutes after Frankenstein expires aboard Walton’s ship the monster himself
appears, moments too late to attempt reconciliation between himself and his master. Perhaps
unexpectedly, he bemoans Victor’s death, exclaiming:
‘That is also my victim!’ he exclaimed: ‘in his murder my crimes are
consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh,
Frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does it avail that I now ask
thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou
lovedst. Alas! he is cold, he cannot answer me.’ (M. W. Shelley, Frankenstein
221).
He comes to beg forgiveness but it is too late, Victor lies dead before him. But in Frankenstein’s
death the monster also sees his own, now inevitable that his dual self has parted. Victor is a
victim to the monster and the monster is a victim to Victor, in the end these two halves to the
same whole have destroyed each other. And here, in yet another subtle reference to “Alastor” the
monster refers to Victor as “generous and self-devoted,” which perfectly describe him though
they may seem contradictory terms. In his self-devoted quest to discover the mysteries of the
universe, Victor was generous with the gift of life which he bestowed onto the monster, even if
such a gift came to ruin them both.
Mary Shelley’s exploration of isolation and self-devotion intensely differs from her
husband’s own attempts. Although in both works the figures that pursue their highest callings to
the point of ostracizing themselves away from friends, family, and the opportunity for real
relationships, which inevitably leads to their doom, in Frankenstein the consequences are
terrifying. Instead of building an elegy to the doomed nature of this practice as Shelley did, Mary
illustrates dangers of isolation and projection of ideals with the relationship between Victor and

68
his creation. The two similar beings cannot coexist without forming an antagonistic relationship
which works to doom them both. It seems as though Percy Shelley wished to suppress this
reading of the relationship between Frankenstein and the monster in the preface that he wrote for
the first edition, but after his death Mary was free to actually emphasize it in her own
introduction for the 1831 edition. This was most likely not out of a spiteful place in Shelley, but
a self-denying one. Holmes posits that in a review Shelley wrote on Frankenstein:
It is impossible to believe that he was not thinking at least partly of himself when
he added, ‘it is thus that too often in society those who are best qualified to be its
benefactors and its ornaments are branded by some accident with scorn, and
changed by neglect and solitude of heart into a scourge and a curse.’ Implicitly,
Shelley accepted his own identification as Frankenstein’s monster. (Holmes, “The
Byron Summer” 334)
But although there is an implicit acceptance in his relation to the monster, Shelley still seems to
be missing the point. While the society who would not accept the monster are certainly at fault
for turning him to a life of isolation, it is Victor’s initial abandonment of his creature that serves
at the catalyst for the entire arc of the narrative. Here, Shelley continues to lament his own
feelings of being discarded and remaining blind to the admonitive properties of the novel, just as
he remains obstinate that his exploration of anti-typical love is a criticism when it, in fact,
mourns it. In short, writing Frankenstein perhaps gave Mary Shelley the platform to do a
fantastic exercise on the possible consequences of her lover’s behavior, not to serve to chastise
him but to warn him of the possible dangers.

69
Works Cited
Abrams, M. H., and Stephen Greenblatt. “Alastor” The Norton Anthology of English Literature.
7th ed. Vol. 2A. New York: Norton, 2000. 702-19. Print.
“bower, 2b.” The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989. OED Online. Oxford University
Press. 10 March 2012 <http://oed.com>

Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. Dir. Kenneth Branagh. Perf. Robert De Niro, Kenneth Branagh,
Helena Bonham Carter. TriStar Pictures, 1994. Dvd.

Holmes, Richard. “Up the River: Bishopgate 1815.” Shelley: The Pursuit. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1975. Print

Holmes, Richard. “The Byron Summer: Switzerland 1816”. Shelley: The Pursuit. New York:
E. P. Dutton, 1975. Print.

Hunter, J. Paul. Mary Shelley, Frankenstein: the 1818 Text, Contexts, Nineteenth-Century
Responses, Criticism. New York: W.W. Norton, 1995. Print.
Mellor, Anne Kostelanetz. “Revising Frankenstein.” Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her
Monsters. New York: Routledge, 1989. Print.

Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Maurice Hindle. Frankenstein, Or, The Modern Prometheus.
London: Penguin, 2003. Print.

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, and Richard Holmes. "Essay On Love." Shelley on Love: An Anthology.
Berkeley: University of California, 1980. Print.

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, and Richard Holmes. “Second Marriage.” Shelley on Love: An
Anthology. Berkeley: University of California, 1980. Print.

70
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, and Richard Holmes. "Love Reborn." Shelley on Love: An Anthology.
Berkeley: University of California, 1980. Print

71
Bibliography
Sunstein, Emily W. Mary Shelley: Romance and Reality. Boston: Little, Brown, 1989. Print.

Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin., and Paula R. Feldman. The Journals of Mary Shelley:
1814-1844. Baltimore [etc.: Johns Hopkins UP, 1995. Print.

Small, Christopher. Ariel like a Harpy: Shelley, Mary and Frankenstein. London: Gollancz,
1972. Print.

