Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2014

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2014

The Moral Landscape of Truth and Lies in 20th
Century Fantasy, and the Lies Used to Tell It
Michael Scott Sullivan
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Sullivan, Michael Scott, "The Moral Landscape of Truth and Lies in 20th Century Fantasy, and the Lies Used to Tell It" (2014). Senior
Projects Spring 2014. Paper 101.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2014/101

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2014 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Sullivan 1

Introduction
“[Fantasy]… does not does not destroy or even insult reason … On the contrary. The
keener and clearer is the reason, the better fantasy it will make”
—J.R.R. Tolkien, “On Fairy-Stories”
Thus is fantasy’s power. Able to creatively play with the circumstances of real
life, fantasy is able to make the abstract, the metaphorical, real, so that it can be examined
and disturbed. Or, to pull a page out of Nietzsche’s notebook, fantasy seeks to explore
truth by literalizing the abused metaphor, forcing its audience to confront the mundane
with fresh eyes. As many critics have argued, Viktor Schlovski perhaps most
convincingly, the role of art in society is to defamiliarize its audience with the everyday,
asking them to look at an object or occurrence or individual as if for the first time. To
Tolkien, this was a matter of what he called “Recovery,” and something he believed
fantasy, or the fairy story, did particularly well. Unlike realistic fiction, which presented
its readers with scenarios that, even if incredibly unlikely, were still acknowledged to
exist within the realm of possibility as it was currently understood, fantasy took it to the
next level, making the impossible, not just the unlikely, the cornerstone of its selfconception. No longer committed to portraying the world as it actually existed, the
authors of fantasy found themselves simultaneously liberated and attacked, gifted with
the power to reinvent the world with a pen stroke while being told their inventions were
nothing but the bastard children of lying minds.
But fantasy, particularly in Tolkienian mold, had an answer for this. As Saler
suggests, the creation of Tolkien’s secondary worlds was not a slapdash and flippant
affair, but rigorous and exact, as Tolkien dedicated himself to the creation of a world
which could look and feel as real as anything within the sphere of Primary Creation. For

Sullivan 2
Tolkien, the attempt to foster a sense of realism was so much more than weaving a
convincing illusion: it was an attempt to illuminate reality, or Primary Creation as he
called it, with fiction. The realistic mode, while indicative of a certain unease with the
liminal place fantasy holds within the literary canon, could therefore also point to
fantasy’s uneasy position on the spectrum between truth and lies as it tries to access truth
through a fictional framework. Intrinsic to fantasy, it seems, is the desire to say
something worth saying; to answer the question “Is it true?” with an unrepentant and
impossible “yes.” (Fairy-Stories 155). Unable to claim absolute truth, but resolute in the
belief that their fictions maintained a connection to truth, the creative enterprises of
Milton, Tolkien, and Pullman defy easy classification within the moral dichotomy of
truth and lies, and maintain a critical self-awareness of the liminal, or even contradictory,
status this assigns them. In other words, the authorship of high fantasy, at least in the
Tolkienian sense, implies an extensive duality of consciousness; its writers and readers
asked to simultaneously regard the claims of the fantastic as completely impossible and
deeply real.
But such a duality of consciousness concerning one’s work is hardly without
precedent, especially in the modern era. As Michael Saler observes, this phenomena in
works of literary fiction picked up during the fin de siècle and proliferated throughout the
20th and 21st centuries as both authors and readers adopted a more ironic stance to works
of fantasy. Developing a sense that Saler terms the “ironic imagination,” the readers and
writers of fantasy during the turn of the century began, as Saler contends, to see their
works as simultaneously true and false, “understood to be explicitly fictional, [yet] . . .
also taken to be real” (Saler 28). As Saler argues, this impressive duality was

Sullivan 3
accomplished primarily by presenting “fantasy realms … in a realist mode, cohesively
structured, empirically detailed, and logically based;” allowing fantastic spaces to adopt
the trappings of realism (25). Yet “Despite their apparent realism, they were marketed as
fictions” (25) with no real claim to truth, such stories engaging the ironic imagination by
asking their audience to “willingly believe in them with the double-minded awareness
that they were engaging in pretense” (30).
What Saler’s concept of ironic imagination does not account for, however, is the
similar frame of mind accessed by Milton who, despite living and writing two-hundred
years before the turn of the 19th century, also sought to reconcile the tension between the
fictional nature of his work and the latent truth it claims to access. By linking the ironic
imagination to an idea of modern thought characterized by rationality and secularism,
Saler strengthens his argument for a modern genesis of the concept but neglects its older
roots in the religious tradition, a gloss that requires him to treat the religious leanings of
Tolkien as a divergent, but important strain of the largely secular New Romance
movement. While such an assumption is not technically inaccurate, especially since New
Romance, as Saler defines it, is marked by an appeal to rationality and secularism to
retain credibility, his theories do not give full credit to the competing duality of
consciousness established in Paradise Lost, exemplified in The Lord of the Rings, and
complicated in His Dark Materials. Thus it will be the task of my argument to address
this gap by examining the tension between truth and lies in Christian storytelling from
Milton and his sources through Tolkien and Pullman, thereby linking the primarily
secular concept of ironic imagination to a more religious context.

Sullivan 4
Such an examination cannot and will not claim to be a comprehensive review of
the available literature, nor can it claim to trace have traced the complex duality of the
ironic imagination back to its source in its analysis of Paradise Lost. Instead, the goal of
my project will be to bring the concept of the ironic imagination into fuller contact with
the realm of religiously motivated fiction in order to determine the change of its stakes.
For if the goal of secularized ironic imagination is to “steer a fine course between the
Scylla of fantasy and the Charybides of realism, or risk alienating [the] audience,” then in
a religious context the stakes become considerably higher as a Christian writer is asked
not only to steer between fantasy and realism, but between blasphemous falsehood and
the Truth (61). Instead of straddling a line between a self-reflexive admission of fiction
and a commitment to the creation of a realistically viable world, the Christian author is
forced to walk the tightrope of admitting their own propensity for human error while
simultaneously claiming to represent some facet of divine Truth, unable to escape either
the implication that their work reflects some truth about Creation or that their own fallen
condition is prone to error. In short, the truth-value of the Christian fiction takes on an
explicitly moral tone; truth being associated with divinity and nearness to God while
falsehood is equated with evil and ultimate spiritual error.
Serving essentially as a counterpoint to Saler’s notion that the ironic imagination
is a primarily secular drive that originates in the modern era, Milton is an ideal way to
demonstrate that the problem of fantasy’s liminal status between truth and lie has roots
that run far deeper than the 19th century. It would be improper to imply that Milton was
fantasy writer, or at least that he conceived of himself in such a way, yet at the same time
he shares much with Tolkien and Pullman, especially in his attempt to justify his

Sullivan 5
excursion into fiction with the fiction that he writes. Torn between the belief in his own
divine inspiration and the awareness of his own fallen condition, Milton was left rewriting and supplementing a biblical (and therefore, in his mind, true) story with his own
imagination. It was his hope that such a re-writing would further clarify the story,
“justifying the ways of God to men” and bringing what was previously located solidly
within the realm of faith into the realm of experiential truth, but he was nevertheless
aware of the potential for failure located in such a direct interaction with a biblical text.
Forever unable to be certain of truth and of God in the fallen state of mankind, Milton
was all too conscious of how readily his work could transform into sin and error, as the
tendency towards self-aggrandizement (the self as a source of truth) could easily lead
towards the lie. It was then Milton’s task to walk the tightrope between his divinely
inspired task to reveal the ultimate truth of God and the supreme sin located in selfaggrandizement and delusion.
To compensate for this unease, Milton not only deploys a rigorous logical frame
for the interpretation of Genesis, but also imbeds it within a story that he admits is, if not
false, at least subject to error. It is not a lie, since as Augustine maintains even in error
one can only lie by giving voice to and presenting as true what one believes to be false,
but even with the assistance of divine inspiration – with access to what is, in his mind,
manifestly true – the possibility of human error and misinterpretation exists, and Milton
openly admits it. It is this admission that leads him to an understanding of his story as
both true and false; true in its divine inspiration but potentially false in its human
manifestation. Equipped with the power to explain the ineffable framework of creation
and the humility necessary to avoid any outright declaration of inaccessible truth, and

Sullivan 6
therefore sin, Milton finds himself perfectly located to write Paradise Lost. And as the
reader is made aware through the characters of Raphael and the narrator, telling a story
about the divine is no easy task, forced as the author/speaker is to translate the
indescribable sphere of heaven into earthly terms, or in other words, utilize the metaphor.
This is, after all, what fantasy is all about. Sourcing truthful observations from the
real world and translating them into the realm of fiction, fantasy is able to do the
impossible and literalize the metaphors that allow humans to make sense of their
existence, thereby forcing them to be re-evaluated. As Milton is the first to admit, these
metaphors are not perfect, subject as they are to human interpretation and distanced from
a sense of ultimate truth in God, but they are the best we have; the only thing with the
power of infusing meaning back into a world which, after the fall, was lost. The story,
therefore, is in some way redeemed, as Milton decides to use its fictional premise (like
the narrator, like Raphael, and even, to a certain extent, like Satan) to bring a matter of
faith into the realm of experience. If God and truth cannot be accessed directly, then
perhaps they can be accessed obliquely through the metaphor, and through story. It is
impossible to confirm a story’s success in such regard since God and truth are ultimately
unknowable entities, but that does not mean that such attempts are to be forbidden. On
the contrary, by attempting to rigorously justify the ways of God to men through the
means of the story, Milton is taking the only path he knows towards divine truth,
remaining certain in his belief that his task is divinely inspired but uncertain in the
fulfillment of his task. This will be the argument presented in Chapter 1.
Although it is difficult to say whether or not such a reading of Milton directly
influenced Tolkien’s conception of his own project, it is relatively easy to observe a

Sullivan 7
similarity in their concerns as writers. Sharing Milton’s own problematic relationship
with truth as a Catholic, Tolkien also turned towards the realm of fiction to communicate
its tenuous connection to truth, certain as he was of a Truth sourced in God that was both
existent and unknowable. Not only did his faith require a belief in the God and truth, but
it also made clear that such a truth was inaccessible to the fallen human mind. Therefore,
like Milton, Tolkien adopted sub-creative fantasy as a path towards God, reading in the
stories of his youth part facets of a single “truth incalculably rich” (“Fairy-Stories” 155)
that he could one day participate in.
But even such a statement – that truth could be found in stories – was itself a
claim to truth with which Tolkien was uncomfortable. If truth itself was inherently
unknowable, how could he possibly claim that the truth was knowable through stories?
Not only would the statement be blatantly contradictory, with stories literally claiming to
do the impossible, but also subtly so, since such an assertion would imply that although
the truth is in large part unknowable, it is accessible only to confirm that stories are
assured vehicles to larger truths. This left Tolkien, like Milton, in the unfortunate position
of trying to communicate truth in a world where truth is unknowable. It is perhaps
unsurprising, then, to see Tolkien take a similar tact, utilizing the liminal status of the
fictional story to communicate the uncertainty involved in using a fictional medium to
covey real truth.
As the bridge between the chiefly religious concerns of Milton in the past and the
primarily secular trends of what Saler identifies with modern fantasy and Pullman,
Tolkien’s influence on my conception of this project is difficult to underestimate. He is
also the critic with the most influence on how I view the question of fantasy’s truth-value,

Sullivan 8
since it is upon his conception of secondary creation and the ability of fantasy to
participate with/reveal aspects of Primary Creation that I base my conception of fantasy’s
project. Because even though Pullman in many ways confirms the secular trend that Saler
reads in modern fantasy, Tolkien is very easily able to adapt the model of realistically
structured fantasy to the religious mode. By drawing on aspects of the observable world,
what Tolkien referred to as Primary Creation, he believed he was drawing himself closer
to a realization of truth in the accurate portrayal of God’s own truth through the mimicry
of secondary creation. Of course Tolkien would never claim that worlds of secondary
creation were simple replicas of the world as it appears under the sun. In fact a huge part
of the power of secondary worlds arose from the engagement of human imagination and
creativity. But in the attempt to bring something new into the world, to shed light on a
new facet of God’s ineffable truth, an author would be forced to create something new,
something that had never been seen before on the world as it stands under the sun. In
other words, Tolkien had to turn to the realm of fantasy to express his truth, even though
he had no guarantee such truths could be communicated.
When he did finally turn to fantasy, however, he was sure to create a secondary
world in which the story had real power and literal connection to truth. After all, in
Middle-Earth there are little to no distinctions between ancient stories and ancient
history, as even in a fallen world where the value of the mythological has fallen into
doubt, the stories of old hold very real value. Ents, hobbits, and almost-forgotten heirs
pop out of the grass, constantly reaffirming the fact that old wives tales and stories told
around the fire to children are remembered for a reason. Stories become a means of
navigating the biggest problems of the age, and they play a critical role in Frodo’s

Sullivan 9
achievement of his own quest. The flip side of this, however, is the power that the lie also
gains. For in a world in which even the most outlandish of stories are reaffirmed as true,
even the most insidious of lies can be believed, especially when they seem more realistic
than the actual truth. Wormtongue is the primary example of such a tendency, playing not
only Theoden’s deepest insecurities to sway him, but also the seemingly impossible
nature of the truth. After all, it is far easier to believe in the unassailable might of an evil
sitting on your doorstep than in tree people no living man has ever seen, or in elves that
dwell isolated from the contact of men. This will be the argument presented in Chapter 2.
Like Milton, Pullman doesn’t necessarily fit into the sphere of the Christian
fantasy writer, but also like Milton, his inclusion complicates and informs a wider
understanding of fantasy that is fundamental to my project. Grounding himself solidly
within the realm of fantasy, he in many ways takes the opposite tack of Milton, which is
only appropriate when considering his project consists primarily of rewriting the story of
Genesis that Milton rewrote. But much has been written about Pullman’s re-appropriation
of Paradise Lost, and little needs to be said here to expand on the subject. What is much
more interesting, in my own opinion, is the way in which Pullman re-appropriates the
entire tradition of religiously motivated fantasy while continuing to maintain an uneasy
relationship with the truth. In essence, he cuts God entirely out of the equation, letting go
the notion of an absolute, unfathomable truth rooted in the divine in preference of a truth
found through human understanding. But at its core, his belief in the revelatory powers of
fantasy remain the same, since Pullman continues to hold out the fantasy story as a path
to truth through fiction in a world where truth is otherwise uncertain. The only difference
seems to be that instead of revealing something about the nature of the divine, the truth

Sullivan 10
that Pullman’s story tries to access is divorced from any connection to God, blossoming
in human understanding and experience rather than any link to divine grace.
This tension between a connection to inexplicable truth and a full human
understanding is given voice in Pullman’s His Dark Materials, especially in the
experience of its protagonist. For although it could be said the trilogy is about many
things, it also is intimately concerned with the question of grace and wisdom, or between
an unconscious understanding of the truth and a fully conscious one. By the trilogy’s
conclusion, the main character moves from one state to another, but most importantly,
she does so by telling stories. Or, for the sake of accuracy, she tells lies, living up to her
namesake by becoming one of the most accomplished liars the story has to offer. But
unlike Milton and Tolkien, who resolutely condemn liars as those who offend truth, and
therefore God, for Pullman the lie becomes a mean to the ultimate end: a fuller,
independent understanding of the truth.
But such claim comes with one important exception. The lies of protagonist Lyra
Silvertongue are only permissible, and indeed only powerful, because she also maintains
a direct relationship with the truth, her lies gaining power and meaning through her
ability to make them stories. Like Pullman himself, Lyra is not initially a liar, but a
storyteller, and she remains a storyteller until she is split from her inexplicable state of
grace and connection to truth and thrust into experience. But as Pullman makes plain,
such a loss of truth, grace, and moral certitude is not to be lamented, but celebrated. Now
that Lyra’s unconscious connection to truth has been lost, a conscious one can begin to
develop. For although a conscious understanding of truth is founded upon a lifetime of
hard work, experience, and suffering, the wisdom it promises is reliant on nothing but

Sullivan 11
human capacity and hard work, instead of a magical/divine understanding that finds its
source in something ineffable and external to the individual.
In Lyra’s case, this instinctual and mysterious connection to truth is made literal
through her serendipitous understanding of the alethiometer, a fictional golden compass
that points to truth instead of North. As she grows older and loses connection with the
state of grace that allowed her to effortlessly read a device that usually requires years of
intense study, so too do her lies lose their potency. Not only that, but as her lies lose their
serendipitous connection to truth, they also stop functioning as stories, instead being
condemned by a myriad of figures within HDM as the meaningless and manipulative lies
they are. Thus unable to access the truth either through grace or through experience in her
transitory state between the two, Lyra seems to no longer be capable of telling stories. In
this way it can be seen that Pullman, for all of his criticism of the fantastic, understands
that to tell a fictional story there must be some grounding in the truth, lest it become as
meaningless as the lies Lyra tells to the harpies in the world of the dead. This will be the
argument presented in Chapter 3.
Thus it will be the goal of my project to demonstrate how these three authors of
fantasy, despite their vastly different worldviews, all agreed on one thing: that fantasy
maintained a connection to truth in spite of its fictional pretense. For even though they
did not agree as to what sort of truth fantasy was able to access, or indeed how it
performed such a prodigious feat, Milton, Tolkien, and Pullman all agreed that fantasy
had a purpose; that it was more than just the sum of its fictitious parts.

Sullivan 12

Chapter 1: To Justify God
Under the sixth entry in the Oxford English Dictionary for “justify” reads one of
the most famous examples of the word in the English language: “That..I may assert th'
Eternal Providence, And justifie the wayes of God to men” (OED). Defined as “Of a
person or body: to show or maintain the justice or reasonableness of (an action, claim,
etc.); to give justification for; to defend as right,” the term “justify” is literally
exemplified by the above quote from Paradise Lost, as John Milton sets himself the
impossible task of demonstrating the justice or reasonableness of God, a being that was,
at least in Milton’s conception, beyond reason (OED). As Stanley Fish persuasively
argues, “In the world as [Milton] perceived it, truth and certainty are achieved not by
moving from evidence … to general conclusions, but by putting in place general
conclusions … [that] will be a function of belief … rather than confirming or
disconfirming [it] (23). In less abstruse terms, Fish sees Milton building worldview, what
Fish calls “the external landscape,” as a function of belief, the truth of which cannot be
confirmed through independently gathered evidence (23). Forever uncertain of God’s
will, purpose, and Truth, Milton fervently believed in the ineffability of the Christian
God, and the inability of post-lapsarian humanity to grasp Him through any facility
besides belief that was, if not blind, than also not founded on reason and evidence. And
yet as this chapter will suggest, such a belief did not deter him from trying, in a way that
Milton believed to be unprecedented, to “give justification for; to defend as right” the
“wayes of God to men,” nor did it prevent him from “assert[ing] Eternal Providence” in
the attempt. Refusing to admit that Paradise Lost is a work of heretical fiction, but also
unable to claim that he, as a member of a fallen humanity, had direct access to Truth

Sullivan 13
through God, Milton therefore takes a middle road, carefully negotiating between a
heretical claim to lying on the one hand and a heretical claim to the truth on the other. In
other words, Milton employs a fictive mode, simultaneously allowing him invoke the
truth of Eternal Providence and avoid the sin located in self-aggrandizement and
delusion.
As the narrator makes plain in the opening stanza, she harbors no illusions as to
how her task, to “justify the ways of God to men,” opens her song to incredible potential
(Milton I. 26). Invoking the Holy Ghost to:
… aid [in] my advent’rous song
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above the Aonian mount while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme, (I. 13-6)
she makes a clear claim to “the heighth of this great argument” (I. 24) upon which she
intends to embark. In the pursuit of “things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme;” things
that “intend to soar/ Above the Aonian mount,” the home of the Muses in classical
mythology, the narrator makes the claim that, if aided by the Holy Ghost, her poem holds
the potential to surpass even the greatness of the classical epics. With historical hindsight
we can see she her claim was not entirely unfounded, as over the course of more than
three centuries interest in Paradise Lost has waxed and waned, but has never wholly
dissipated, but the proviso that she attaches to her success is at least as important to her
conception of her work as her prophetic insight. For even as the narrator expresses
confidence in her ability to fulfill the task at hand and justify the ways of God to men, she

Sullivan 14
is equally confident that she cannot do so alone, her own condition as a member of fallen
humanity prohibiting her from access to the truth without divine intervention.
Indeed, interspersed within what might easily be called the hubris of this opening
stanza are also the hints of humility, the inclusion of which Milton believed was essential
in avoiding the sin of self-aggrandizement. As the narrator requests of the Holy Ghost,
“What in me is dark,/ Illumine, what is low raise and support,” the acknowledgment of
her own darkness and deficiency serving to distance herself from any direct claim to a
rational understanding of God (I. 22-3). If she claims to assert the truth of Eternal
Providence and justify the ways of God to men in the opening stanza, therefore, the
opening stanza also makes clear that the narrator will not do so under her own power, her
access to Eternal Providence resting solely on the guidance and inspiration of the Holy
Ghost and her belief in God. Given the well-documented classical roots of the text, it is
possible to read such a proviso as an insincere statement of humility – as nothing more
than a nod to the epic form upon which the structure of Paradise Lost is framed – but
given the equally well-documented strength of Milton’s religious belief, as well as the
inclusion of two additional invocations of the Muse in Books VII and IX outside the
formulaic expectations of the genre, this seems increasingly unlikely. Instead, when
coupled with the formulation of the internal narratives woven by Raphael and Satan, such
an admission of deficiency on the part of the narrator seems to indicate a complex
conception of how Milton understood truth in a fallen world, and how one might be able
to access it in the fallen state.
The answer that Milton arrived at, it will be argued, will be essentially the same
answer that Tolkien and Pullman arrived at nearly three-centuries later: the fantastic

Sullivan 15
mode of storytelling. For although he would have never conceptualized it this way
himself, the tension inherent in trying to access the truth in a world defined by the truth’s
inaccessibility was something that all three authors felt acutely, and described in their
own works of fiction. Milton, Tolkien, and Pullman never came to a mutual
understanding of how the fantastic mode achieved such an impossible task, nor did they
even share a common conception of what “truth” fantasy actually achieved, yet they all
seemed to believe in its power to do so. In Paradise Lost, Milton’s only standard for truth
is the Word of God, his unshakable belief in the Bible forming the inviolable construct in
which his epic takes form. With truth thus reductively and resolutely defined, it is
tempting to say Milton’s conceptualization lacks the complexity of Tolkien’s or
Pullman’s, the illusion of simplicity arising from the unity of thought such conviction
provides. But for anyone familiar with the actual text of Genesis, it is obvious how freely
Milton has played with the original story as he draws heavily from the extra-canonical
sources of Christian doctrine and his own imagination. Indeed, very little of what takes
place in Paradise Lost finds its sources in biblical text, the story of Genesis making no
mention of Satan, Jesus, Heaven’s hosts, or the fall of the rebel angels. And although the
accumulated weight of more than 1,600 years of Christian interpretation and doctrine
play a huge part in defining the shape of Milton’s narrative, there is much that arises from
Milton, his ingenuity playing a large part in his attempt to weave a cogent narrative from
the tangled strands of Christian thought. Almost necessitated by his stated goal of
“justify[ing] the ways of God to men,” his creative liberties with the strictly canonical
source material allow him to try and “justify” that which could previously be understood
only through faith, attempting to clarify and flesh out a story that had been building

Sullivan 16
momentum for generations. In this way, Milton’s story is simultaneously true and not
true, deviating from the strict truth of its doctrinal sources for the sake of clarity and
hoping to “justify” what was previously held to be knowable through faith alone. For
even as he digresses from doctrine, Milton continues to hope that his writings might be
divinely inspired, guided by his own faith towards an alternate yet compatible truth to the
ultimate truth of Word of God.

Milton’s Narrator

As has already been demonstrated, in the opening stanza of Paradise Lost the
narrator assumes a complex position in relation to her story and its claim to truth. But in
order to demonstrate that such an admission of humility is not merely lip service, or blind
homage paid to the traditional invocation of the Muses in classical epics, Milton’s two
other invocations of the Muses must be called into question. For despite the narrator’s
initial confidence in the guidance of “Eternal Providence,” by the beginning of Book VII
that confidence can be seen to waiver. Invoking Urania, the Greek muse of heavens, the
narrator claims that she has been “Up led by thee/ Into the Heav’n of Heav’ns I have
presumed/ An earthly guest and drawn the empyreal air,/ Thy tempering,” in order to sing
her song (VII. 12-5). Through Urania’s tempering, it seems, the earthly narrator has
found it possible to “drawn the empyreal air” and depict in song what she as seen of the
“Heav’n of Heav’ns” in order to rationally justify God. But instead of harping on what
she considers to be the success of poem’s first half, the narrator quickly turns her
attention to how the second half might fail, preoccupied as she is with the precarious

Sullivan 17
nature of her argument. Beseechingly she requests of Urania “With like safety guided
down/ Return me to my native element/ Lest …/ … I fall/ Erroneous there to wander and
forlorn (15-9).
And yet the narrator gives her audience no clue as to why such fears are so
prevalent, especially since she acknowledges that Urania “Still governs … my song”
(VII. 30). Stanley Fish does, however, provide some valuable insight on the matter when
he argues convincingly that, as far as Milton was concerned, “a person’s conviction that
he is on [the true path towards God and truth] … can never be supported by independent
evidence and can always become a matter of doubt” (5). Before the fall, Milton portrays
humans as able to, at least to some extent, accurately perceive the truth through God not
only through belief, but also through “discursive” intellect, a point that will be expanded
upon later in this chapter (V. 488). As Fish maintains, however, “This clarity … stands in
marked … contrast to the postlapsarian condition, which is burdened by … difficulties,”
the chief of which, in a telling choice of words, is concerned with the fact that “the vision
of those who would rediscover [this clarity] is irredeemably darkened” (4-5). So when the
narrator requests that the Heavenly Muse “What in me is dark/ Illumine,” it takes only a
small stretch of the imagination to read into this petition a genuine concern on Milton’s
part for humanity’s inability to access and portray the true path towards God. Always in
doubt, since it is impossible to confirm empirically that one is on the path towards God
and truth, the narrator is therefore forced to adopt a liminal stance between a claim to
Eternal Providence and human error, certain as she is of her divine inspiration, but
uncertain in her own human fulfillment of the task assigned.

Sullivan 18
A relatively minor, but important example of this uncertainty reveals itself in
Book VII as well, in which the narrator tries to negotiate between the conception of her
patron as Urania, the Greek muse of the heavens, and the Holy Ghost of Christian
theology. “Descend from Heav’n, Urania,” the narrator requests:
by that name
If rightly thou art called …
……………………………
The meaning not the name I call for thou
Nor of the Muses nine nor on the top
Of old Olympus dwell’st but Heav’nly born. (1-7)
Uncertain as to whether Urania is the name by which she should praise her, the narrator
confesses her uncertainty in the second line of the Book, but at the same time claims that
it is “the meaning not the name” by which Urania is called. Making clear that when she
calls to Urania, the narrator does not imagine that she is summoning one “of the Muses
nine” who, according to myth, “on the top/ Of old Olympus dwell’st,” the narrator
instead appeals to a patron “Heav’nly born.” But unable to claim that she has a perfect
access to the way in which the “Heavenly Muse,” or “Spirit” as she is referred to in Book
I. 17, inspires her song, the narrator creates an imperfect metaphorical equation to explain
their interaction, liking the Holy Spirit’s illumination of her theme to the way the
classical Muses were said to illuminate the classical epic. In this way the narrator
endeavors to justify the ways of God to men in some small way, her admittedly imperfect
metaphor attempting to relate the unknowable mechanics of divine inspiration to the
slightly more grounded, comprehensible theme of classical inspiration.

Sullivan 19
In the third and final invocation of the muse in Book IX, however, the narrator’s
doubts in her own project reach their zenith as she calls into question not the small matter
of a single name or metaphor, but the whole poem itself. Claiming that Paradise Lost’s
“argument/ Not less but more heroic than” (IX. 13-4) the three great epics of antiquity –
Homer’s Iliad, Odyssey, and Virgil’s Aeneid – and a wide variety of more contemporary
romance, the narrator seems to have unshakable faith in the:
… celestial patroness who deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplored
And dictates to me slumb’ring or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse” (IX. 21-4).
There is, however, one proviso. Despite the “nightly visitations” and “inspir[ation]” the
“celestial patroness” deigns to bestow, the narrator seems to understand that Paradise
Lost’s heroic argument is wasted unless an “answerable style … can [be] obtain[ed]” by
its author (IX. 19). Indeed, the narrator claims this is the only way that the argument
could fail, if “an age too late or cold/ Climate or years damp my intended wing” and the
narrator fails to suitably convey the message of her patroness. Susceptible to the mortal
conditions of cultural milieu, cold weather, and old age, the narrator makes clear that her
story could easily be “Depressed … if all where mine;” the narrator’s own necessary, but
flawed modifications designed to justify the story of Genesis giving it the potential for
mortal flaw despite its divine origins (IX. 45). Thus it seems the success of Paradise Lost
hangs on a sophisticated balance between the ultimate Truth of raw, divine inspiration
and the comprehensible rationality of the tempered human interpretation, with the
yawning abyss of what is unknowable and what is false on either side.

Sullivan 20
Whether or not Paradise Lost achieves this delicate balance is a moot point, just
as it is far from certain whether such a balance would necessarily guarantee successfully
legible justification of the ways of God to men. C.S Lewis1 believed that such a task was
impossible, writing in his now-famous preface to Paradise Lost that “A God,
theologically speaking, much worse than Milton’s, would escape criticism if only he had
been made sufficiently awful, mysterious, and vague” (437). In other words, Milton’s
God only seems cruel because he tries to justify the unjustifiable and refuses to leave
God, in Lewis’ opinion, in his appropriately mysterious and vague state. At the same
time, William Empson describes Milton as having been at least moderately successful in
his attempt “to make his God appear less wicked, as he tells us he will do from the start
[I.25]2, and he does succeed in making him noticeably less wicked than the traditional
Christian one” (10). The distinction his critics make, therefore, seem not to find their
source in Milton’s effectiveness as a writer, but in their own personal beliefs. If, like
Lewis suggests, “those who say the dislike Milton’s God only mean the dislike God” in
general, than God benefits from Milton’s justification, as can be seen in Empson (437).
But if, as Empson suggests, one already believes wholeheartedly in a the inherent justice
of God’s Christian conceptualization, then Milton’s attempt to justify Him risks only
“describ[ing] God ‘imprudently,’” as can be seen in Lewis (9). One believed God could
not be rationally justified, only believed, and the other refused to believe unless God was
rationally justified, but Milton’s curse was that he was stuck in the middle. Believing
1

Highly influential as not only a 20th century Christian thinker and Milton critic, Lewis was also fantasy
writer contemporary with Tolkien.
2
Line-references given by Empson “Are to the nearest factor of five,” who feels that “The show of
scientific accuracy about literary quotations has reached a point which feels odd to anyone who knows how
numbers are really used in the sciences” (“Preface”). Although I feel as though my grasp of how numbers
are really used in the sciences is perfectly adequate, I have chosen to quote the same line, “And justify the
ways of God to men,” as I. 26.

Sullivan 21
wholeheartedly not only in God, but also that God could be rationalized, at least
imperfectly, Milton was compelled to try and justify Him, and used the fictive mode to
do so.

Milton’s Raphael

If an examination of Milton’s narrator gives us an adequate sense of how Milton
conceives the benefits and risks of his task, than an examination of Milton’s Raphael
gives us a sense of how Milton thought the justification of God to men might be
achieved. Tasked by God with warning Adam and Eve of Satan’s intent to seduce them,
“Lest willfully transgressing [they] pretend/ Suprisal unadmonished, unforewarned,”
Raphael is sent to Earth to impart divine knowledge (V. 244-5). In other words, God
wishes to “fulfill/ All justice” (246-7) by ensuring the only factor in man’s fall from
grace is his own disobedience, and thus sends Raphael as the agent of His justice so that
the pair cannot claim ignorance if they succumb to the “deceit and lies” (243) of Satan.
But just like the narrator, Raphael finds this divinely appointed task more difficult than
expected. On his first attempt, Raphael tries to speak to Adam and Eve as if they were
angels, assuming as standard the “intuitive” mode of angelic thought (488):
Attend! That thou art happy owe to God.
That thou continuest such owe to thyself,
That is, to thy obedience: therein stand!
This was the caution giv’n thee. (520-523)

Sullivan 22
Indeed, if the consciousness of man had been shaped in the angelic mode, Raphael would
have needed only four lines to complete his divinely appointed task, having successfully
communicated to Adam and Eve that their happiness, given by God, is only maintained
by obedience to Him. An angel, “act[ing] by intuition or immediate apprehension3,”
would have immediately grasped the truth of such a statement and moved on (OED). But
as Raphael himself admits, “discourse/ is oftest” man’s path to reason, and so the
completion of his task requires not four lines, but almost three Books (488-9).
Unable to even comprehend disobedience to God before the arrival of Raphael,
Adam is perplexed by Raphael’s emphasis on obedience, since Adam is in his “constant
thoughts/ Assured” (V. 552-3) that “we will never forget to love/ Our Maker and obey
Him” (550-1). Therefore Adam presses Raphael to explain fully the unprecedented
concept of a Satanic individual who would actively seek to rebel against God, a
discursive task for which Raphael is desperately underprepared. For although Raphael
refuses to rule out the possibility that “[Man’s] body may at last turn all to spirit,/
Improved by tracts of time, and winged ascend/ Ethereal as we,” there is clearly a
fundamental difference between the two races that runs deeper than the physical
substance of their form for which Raphael has difficulty compensating (497-9). As
Raphael suggests to the couple, they should “Meanwhile enjoy/ [Their] fill of what
happiness this happy state/ Can comprehend, incapable of more,” implying that although
Adam and Eve might one day attain the superior awareness and joy of the angelic
consciousness, such a mode of thought is currently beyond their reach (503-5). So when
Adam asks Raphael to explain the fall of Satan and the rebel hosts; to clarify for him why
3

It is interesting to note the OED again uses Milton as a primary example of this usage, citing the same
line in Paradise Lost, V.488.

Sullivan 23
an angel would forsake God and choose to pass from the angelic “high state of bliss into
what woe,” Raphael is at a loss, initially taken aback by Adam’s discursive interest in the
subject and the difficulty inherent to satiating it (543).
Raphael does not, however, doubt that the human pair might reach some
understanding of the truth through their discursive mode, since the angel acknowledges
that the reasoning of angels and men “differ(s) but in degree, of kind the same” (490).
Therefore Raphael must still try and find a way to fulfill God’s justice, despite Adam and
Eve’s lack of angelic intuition. “After a short pause,” as if in hesitation, Raphael explains
to Adam that what he is about to hear– the only way Raphael can make him understand
the affairs of heaven – will be the first story in human history:
High matter thou enjoin’st me O Prime of Men,
Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate
To human sense th’ invisible explóits
Of warring spirits, …
… perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? Yet for thy good
This is dispensed, and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense I shall delineate so
By lik’ning spiritual to corporeal forms
As may express them best. Though what if Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven and things therein
Each to other like more than on Earth is thought? (V. 562-73)

Sullivan 24
It is in this lengthy preamble that Raphael’s unease is most explicitly described. For
although he intersperses other such disclaimers throughout his narration, reminding
Adam of the “Unspeakable” (VI. 297) nature of the angelic battle, and that the story thus
far is nothing more than an extended metaphor, “measuring things in Heav’n by things on
Earth” (VI. 893), in the moment of Raphael’s indecision the audience is given the clearest
glimpse into the “High matter …/ Sad task and hard” of relating the events of Heaven to
men. Addressing himself rhetorically with questions like “how shall I relate/ To human
sense th’ invisible explóits/ of warring spirits,” Raphael shows his reluctance to engage in
such a subject, going so far as to wonder aloud if such an attempt might “perhaps/ not
[be] lawful,” humanity’s limited understanding forcing Raphael to consciously
misrepresent Heaven. For despite Raphael’s admission that things on Heaven and Earth
might be “Each to other like more than … is thought,” he is nevertheless constrained by
“what surmounts the reach/ Of human sense,” unable as he is to convey the affairs of
Heaven directly. Instead, he is forced to resort to metaphor, “lik’ning spiritual to
corporeal forms/ As may express them best;” forced to sacrifice a perfectly accurate
depiction of events for one his audience can comprehend. In other words, Raphael does
not, in the strictest sense of the term, tell the truth, his human audience lacking the
powers of perception necessary to comprehend it. But because “for thy good/ This [story]
is dispensed,” Raphael has little choice but to try, creatively yet inaccurately comparing
“spiritual to corporeal forms” in order to prepare Adam and Eve for their temptation.
It must be said, however, that despite the inaccuracies in comparing the affairs of
Heaven to the affairs of Earth, the imperfect metaphorical equations Raphael is forced to
construct in his story are never considered lies. Such distinction is critical, since to imply

Sullivan 25
otherwise would be to suggest that Raphael, an archangel on dispatch from God, would
be sinning against ultimate Truth and therefore God. Instead, as a reading of Augustine
might suggest, Raphael’s story, while inaccurate, still maintains a claim to truth because
he does not tell it with a “double heart” (qtd. Griffiths 27). Instead of “keep[ing] one
thing concealed in the heart and … hav[ing] another ready on the tongue” (qtd. 26) which
was for Augustine was the lie’s chief characteristic, Raphael does his best to truthfully
“relate/ To human sense th’ invisible explóits/ Of warring spirits” and reveal the contents
of his heart. Human sense prevents him from achieving a perfect degree of accuracy in
his revelation of Heaven’s invisible exploits, but it does not prevent him from trying to
represent what actually occurred, the fictitious mode allowing Raphael to reveal the
contents of his heart to the greatest extent possible. So when Raphael makes the conceit
that the host of Heaven drink “… rubied nectar…/ In pearl, in diamond, in massy gold4,”
during their feasts, he does not mean for himself to be taken literally (Milton V. 634-5).
Instead he means only to try and illustrate to his human audience what it might mean to
“Quaff immortality and joy,” in the presence of God, the full comprehension of which is
fundamentally beyond their comprehension (638). Inaccurate throughout, but never once
guilty of lying, therefore, Raphael proceeds with his story, utilizing the imperfect
metaphorical equations of fiction to try and truthfully relay the matters of his heart to
those who otherwise could not understand them.
It is in this moment that Raphael finds himself in the place of Paradise Lost’s
narrator, tasked by Eternal Providence with explaining the affairs of Heaven and of God
to a human audience that is fundamentally unable to comprehend them. For the sake of
4

C.S. Lewis makes much of this line, citing it as a primary example of the “displeasure” Milton evokes
from the devout in his attempt to add “anthropomorphic details” to a description of the Divine (437-8).

Sullivan 26
fairness, it must be said that their respective audiences are fundamentally different, since
the narrator’s audience (the reader of Paradise Lost) has already fallen, while Raphael’s
has not yet eaten of the forbidden fruit. But in Milton’s conception, it seems as if humans
both pre- and post-lapsarian lack the ability to directly understand what occurs in Heaven,
their mode of reasoning relying primarily on discourse, not intuition. Therefore if
Raphael is to complete his task, he must first, like the narrator, find a way of
communicating heavenly matters to those who cannot comprehend them. Unsurprisingly,
he chooses to follow the narrator’s example once more, resorting to the fictive mode to
relate a comparable, yet fundamentally inaccurate story that humanity “Can comprehend,
incapable of more.”

Milton’s Satan

And yet C.S. Lewis’ point still stands. An examination the narrator acquaints the
reader with the difficulties inherent to justifying the ways of God to men, just as
Raphael’s story provides an example of how such difficulties can be subverted through
the fictive mode, but the question remains: why attempt to rationalize God at all? As
Lewis suggests, “A God, theologically speaking, much worse than Milton’s, would
escape criticism if only he had been made sufficiently awful, mysterious, and vague,” and
yet Milton, risking criticism and blasphemy, defiantly resists such a relatively easy
solution in his attempt to do the impossible and clarify what is by its very nature vague.
In Milton’s conception of Satan, however, such an impossible task becomes a necessity,
as the “Artificer of fraud, … the first/ That practiced falsehood,” shatters the perfect

Sullivan 27
prelapsarian confidence in belief with the invention of the lie, and Milton’s narrator is
forced to defend her God by the new, postlapsarian rules (IV. 121-2). For even though the
story of Paradise Lost is diametrically opposed to the perverting influence of Satan’s
“glozing lies,” when examined closely the story and the lie share much in common as
products of a world fallen from grace (III. 93). Cut off from God, truth, and certainty in a
world where belief has been called into doubt, each actively seeks to interpret the truth of
the world around them, employing the same creative practices to translate unknowable,
divine truth into a narrative that can be easily grasped. Where they differ, then, is in
intention; the narrative of Paradise Lost seeking to justify and confirm the abstruse ways
of God to men while the lies of Satan seek to drive a wedge between God and His
subjects by exploiting the abstruse nature of His will. In this ambiguity, both Satan and
Milton’s narrator seem to thrive, each finding in God’s obscurity the space to provide
their own input by creatively recombining the elements of indisputable, divine truth. But
where the narrator tries only to glorify God and perhaps succeeds, Satan tries only to tear
Him down and absolutely fails, his lies in Paradise Lost framed not only as grossly
inaccurate, but also absolutely vain as his attempts to disparage God do nothing more
than inadvertently glorify Him.
“With calumnious art/ Of counterfeited truth” Satan begins his war with Heaven,
seducing the once-loyal angels away from their divine purpose with the first lie ever told
(V. 770). For while it is not presented as an alternative to Genesis at its onset, Satan’s lie
does suggest a completely different way of looking at the world, recasting God as a tyrant
and his subjects as oppressed beings of near-infinite physical and mental power. And
although such a classification might seem redundant, each aspect is important for Satan’s

Sullivan 28
argument, the redundancy allowing him slip his own interpretation of events
surreptitiously in between. For God to be a tyrant, Satan argues, His subjects must be
oppressed, and if His subjects are oppressed, then God must be a tyrant. God is never
portrayed in Paradise Lost as a tyrant, but Satan feels repressed, allowing Satan to
creatively equate his feelings of repression with God’s tyrannical nature. In this way
Satan does not have to completely contradict what is believed to be true, only put a
different spin on it, misconstruing and misinterpreting the benevolent actions of God as
restricting. But as Abdiel, the only loyal angel among Satan’s host, states clearly in his
rebuttal to Satan’s lie,
. . . by experience taught we know how good
And of our good and of our dignity
How provident He is, how far from thought
To make us less. (826-9)
To Abdiel, the falsity of Satan’s story is self- evident, the “experience” of angelic bliss
providing vivid proof to the claim that the “good and . . . dignity” of the angels are high
priorities of God. If Satan wants to secede and bring the question of God into the realm of
experience, therefore, he must find a way to do the impossible and establish malcontent
in the blissful seat of Heaven.
But in this respect Satan’s creative powers do not desert him. Having previously
been “… of the first,/ If not the first archangel in pow’r,/ In favor, and preeminence” (V.
659-661), Satan finds an excuse to feel robbed of his importance by the ascension of
Jesus to the right hand of God, “deep malice thence conceiving and disdain” in response
to a perceived wrong (666). Armed now “With envy against the Son of God,” Satan finds

Sullivan 29
he “… could not bear/ Through pride that sight [of Jesus] and thought himself impaired,”
his imagined impairment allowing him to conceive of the malice and disdain necessary to
cast God as a tyrant (662-665). As Abdiel later points out, there can be no grounding for
such resentment, since “all honor to [Jesus] done/ Returns our own,” but for Satan this
hardly matters, since now he has an excuse, no matter how flimsy, to feel maligned (8445). But by naming God a tyrant and inventing an entirely different way to look at the
world, Satan finds himself, at least at first, utterly alone. If his lie is to gain any credence
in a world that only values truth, he must make everyone else believe it, replacing the
unifying knowledge of divine truth with a unifying belief in his own falsehood. In this
respect he is only partially successful, his alternate narrative seducing only a third of
heaven’s host away from God, but when examined more closely, his achievement is
nothing less than remarkable. Having recently conceived the of malice and distain in a
place defined by its perfect bliss, Satan then proceeds to instill it in others, convincing
some of them that their bliss is nothing of the sort. Instead, Satan argues, the lot of the
angels is that of servitude; their blind trust in and obedience to God allowing them to be
tricked into thinking theirs is a world of bliss. Now it is up to the “better councils” of
Satan to “erect/ Our minds and teach us to cast off this yoke,” freeing themselves from
belief in God’s authority in preference of their own (785-6).
Sufficiently motivated by his inventions malice and despair, all Satan now
requires is an argument where his “better councils” can shine; a chink in the divine logic
where the belief and consensus of the heavenly host can be challenged and called into the
realm of experience. And ironically, it is Abdiel, the only loyal angel in all of Satan’s
assemble host, that gives Satan exactly what he needs. When Abdiel asks Satan “… shalt

Sullivan 30
thou dispute/ With [God] the points of liberty who made/Thee what thou art,” he does so
in a rhetorical fashion, meaning to call attention to the absurdity of disputing allegiance
owed to He that gave you being to begin with (V. 821-3). But Satan, realizing his
opportunity has come, seizes the moment to ask Abdiel spitefully:
… who saw
When this Creation was? Remember’st thou
Thy making while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now,
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised (856-60).
As Satan understands all too well, such direct evidence is impossible to obtain As Gordon
Teskey observes in a footnote to the passage quoted above, “there is no evidence for,
because there is no angelic witness of, what Abdiel affirms: the Son’s creation of the
angels. But such evidence is by definition impossible to obtain: Abdiel cannot witness his
own creation as he is not there to be a witness until he is made” (Milton 130). Abdiel
cannot, therefore, affirm or deny Satan’s claim that the angels could have been selfbegotten, forced as he is to rely on and espouse what he believes instead of relying on his
own experience, since he could not have been present to witness his own creation. The
same holds true of Satan’s argument, his own claim proving to be nothing but speculation
by the same logic he uses to disprove Abdiel’s, but for Satan’s purposes the evident
logical fallacy hardly matters. For although he has not won a victory in debate, Satan has
uncovered an angelic assumption that rests entirely on faith in God, which allows him to
ask that God and the loyal angels to do the impossible: to engage Satan on an experiential
level and prove empirically it was so.

Sullivan 31
Unable to meet Satan’s rhetorical challenge, Abdiel is forced to retreat, but not
before he fires one last parting shot back at the rebel host: “soon expect to feel/ [God’s]
thunder on thy head, devouring fire!/ Then who created thee lamenting learn/ When who
can uncreate thee thou shalt know!” (V. 892-5) It is here that critics like William Blake,
Empson, and even Pullman sink their teeth, reading in Abdiel’s threat an
acknowledgement that Satan has won his debate and now must be silenced through the
physical violence of a tyrannical God. Thus they are able to take Satan at face value when
he, in the pits of Hell, claims that He “who overcomes/ By force hath overcome but half
His foe” (I. 638-9), just as they are able to read a kind of tyrannical suppression in Jesus’
refusal to “vouchsafe” any “strife with [the rebels]” (VI. 823) besides martial. In this
context Satan becomes a hero, alternately exemplified for his “courage and majesty and
firm and patient opposition to an omnipotent force” (Shelley 393) and his “desire,” which
is so strong that “Reason [cannot] usurp its place & govern the unwilling” (Blake 389),
and such a reading of Paradise Lost is by no means invalid. In fact, just such reading is
the cornerstone of Pullman’s His Dark Materials, the likes of which will be explored in
depth in Chapter 3. But whereas these critics celebrate the transition from a worldview
defined by belief to one defined by experience as a triumph of intellectual independence
over slavery, it seems relatively clear that Milton does not take the same tact. In fact,
instead of being “of the Devil’s party without knowing it,” as both Blake and Pullman
suggest, it seems far more likely that Milton wrote expressly against the Devil’s party as
he sought, through his story, to undo the damage done by Satan’s lie and reclaim the
fallen world for God (389).

Sullivan 32
Milton’s Rebuttal

The confusion arises, on both the atheistic (Blake, Empson) and devout (Lewis)
sides of the debate, from the fact that Milton engages the Devil in his own game. Instead
of following Lewis’ advice and citing Eternal Providence and belief as glosses necessary
for writing about the ineffable, Milton attempts to fully engage with his own conception
of Satan and the fall by engaging with the uncertainty of the experiential mode. Such an
attempt might be ill-advised, just as it might be unsuccessful, but by examining the
characters of Milton’s Raphael and narrator it can be shown that he did try, in no
uncertain terms, to justify the ways of God to men, and that he was intimately aware of
the difficulties inherent in such a task. Therefore, instead of quoting Scripture at Satan to
lay the matter at rest, the experiential equivalent of allowing God one (or many) grand,
vague, and mysterious “I told you so”(’s), Milton seeks to rationally reincorporate the
fallen world, catalyzed by Satan and the lie, back into the folds of God’s divine plan,
thereby glorifying Satan’s role in shattering the blissful realm of belief. This is not to say
that the loss of a direct connection to God and truth through belief is not to be lamented,
only that such a loss does not constitute a victory on the part of Satan. On the contrary:
even though it becomes the Satanic creed “to do ill our sole delight/ As being contrary to
His high will/ Whom we resist” (I.160-3), Milton makes clear that he “Who seeks/ To
lessen [God] against his purpose serves” (VII. 613-4).
For as even Satan acknowledges, God’s omnipotence makes it almost impossible
to evil – to exist “contrary to His high will” – in a world that finds its source in Him.

Sullivan 33
writes characters like Raphael and his narrator that are tasked with justifying truths which
are, by their very nature, unjustifiable, and watches them struggle in the world which
defines its connection to truth not through belief in God, but through experience. “If then
[God’s] providence/ Out of evil seek to bring forth good,” Satan admits, “Our labor must
be to pervert that end/ And out of good still to find means of evil,” the task of the Satanic
hosts becoming more complex as they try to outmaneuver and confound the will of an
omniscient God (I. 162-5). As to what good God will bring forth from evil, Satan cannot
guess, but the choirs of angels glorifying the new-made Earth seem to have a better idea.
“Who seeks/ To lessen Thee against his purpose” sing the loyal angels, “serves/ To
manifest the more thy might, his evil/ Thou usest and from thence creat’st more good,”
thereby confirming Satan’s suspicion that even in seeking to foil God’s plans, he is
actually serving them (VII. 613-6). As to how Satan’s evil acts turn to good, however, the
angels are frustratingly vague, pointing only to “this new-made world, another Heav’n …
the happy seat of men,/ Earth,” as if it in some way explains Satan’s role in inadvertently
creating more good (VII. 617-8, 623-4). But while God certainly creates the Earth and its
human inhabitants in response to Satan’s uprising, “lest [Satan’s] heart exalt him in the
harm/ Already done to have dispeopled Heav’n,” His reasoning goes deeper, using the
Satanic invention of doubt and the lie to test His followers and give meaning to their
obedience (VII. 150-1).
As God explains to His followers, “under long obedience tried,/ … Earth be made
changed into Heav’n and Heav’n to Earth,/ One Kingdom, joy and union without end”
(VII. 159-61), emphasizing like Raphael “[the angel’s] happy state/ Hold as you yours
while our obedience holds,/ On other surety none” (V. 536-8). Only “under long

Sullivan 34
obedience,” it seems, can humans be proven worthy to join the ranks of Heaven, holding
their happy state, like the angels, “On other surety none.” And while this commitment to
and emphasis on obedience may seem arbitrary, it is important to keep in mind what this
steadfast obedience also represents: resisting temptation. As Raphael explains to Adam
and Eve:
Our volunteer service [God] requires,
Not our necessitated: such with Him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find. For how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willingly or no, who will but what they must
By destiny and no other choose? (V. 529-534)
illustrating just how important willing obedience is to God. Without free will, or a
freedom from the necessities of destiny, there can be no choice but to serve, as Raphael
makes plain: if destiny had control over humans and angels, they would be limited to
“what they must/ By destiny and no other choose.” Equipped with free will, however,
angels and humans are given the opportunity to “volunteer service,” choosing with free
hearts to “serve/ willingly or no;” their decision based off of nothing more than their love
of God. This is the only service God requires; the entire reason behind God’s decision to
make his creations “just and right,/ Sufficient to have stood though free to fall:” without
the ability to fall and choose incorrectly, all obedience done to Him would be rendered
the meaningless lip-service of slaves (III. 98-9).
There is, however, one thing missing in God’s grand scheme to grant freedom of
choice to and receive worthy praise from His subjects. For although Adam, Eve, and the

Sullivan 35
angels do not lack the free will necessary to disobey God, they lack the motivation, their
paradisal and perfect state providing no impetus for change, until the fall of Satan. Until
Raphael relates to Adam the story of Satan’s fall, he is completely unaware that he is
“both will and deed created free,” since his “constant thoughts/ Assure me and still
assure” that to worship God is “so just” (V. 548-53). So evident is the justice of Adam’s
love for God that it never even crosses his mind to disobey, confirmed in his “constant
thoughts” that God deserves to be glorified. It is only when Raphael “tell’st/ [what] Hath
passed in Heaven,” does “some doubt within [him] move,” his mind opening to the
possibility that there could be a conceivable reason for rebelling against God and
rejecting the gift of His bliss (V. 553-4). Thus it can be seen that Raphael’s story and
Satan’s lie are, in this case, unified in their purpose, designed to open Adam’s mind and
give him the ability to choose between belief in God and belief in the self.
This is the singular ingenuity of Satan’s lie, since through its utilization he is able
to provide a viable alternative to unwavering belief and eternal bliss. By positing that the
angels are “self-begot, self-raised,” and therefore self-reliant, Satan commits the sin of
self-aggrandizement in suggesting that truth is somehow existent outside of God;
accessible through independent experience, not belief in Him. But despite the fact that
such a claim is framed as an outright lie in the context of Paradise Lost, the temptation to
conceive of the individual, independent from God, as a source of certainty and truth is,
for some, too much to bear. It is certainly too much for Eve, who upon tasting the
forbidden fruit, thanks the Tree of Knowledge for “Experience … to thee I owe/ Best
guide” (IX. 807-8), just as it is too much for the rebel angels, who believe their “own
right hand(s)/ Shall teach us by highest deeds by proof” (V. 864-5). It is even too much,

Sullivan 36
as Milton might suggest, for those who read Satan as a hero of empirical thought and
truth independent from God, as they are themselves tempted by Milton’s Satan into
believing in an experiential access to truth. As to precisely what such a persuasive ability
on the part of Milton says about his allegiance, as it were, is difficult to pinpoint, but to
suggest that as a “true Poet” he is unequivocally “of the Devil’s party” is to completely
ignore Raphael and the narrator of Paradise Lost, whose projects seek to actively engage
and challenge the lies of Satan (Blake 389).
But as pious individuals, both Raphael and the narrator must needs ensure that
when they do engage and challenge the lies of Satan in the experiential, they do not fall
into the sin of self-aggrandizement themselves. Thus they employ what Saler would
describe as the “ironic imagination” and a fantastic mode of storytelling, claiming that the
stories they use to justify the ways of God to men are “understood to be explicitly
fictional, [yet] . . . also taken to be real” (Saler 28). As uncertainty arises in the fallen
state “not to the identification of the imperative—do God’s will—but to the identification
of the stance or course of action that is its local fulfillment,” both Raphael and the
narrator are certain only that they desire to do God’s will, not that they will actually
achieve it (Fish 5). Therefore when they make a claim to truth, which in both of their
minds is synonymous with claiming access to the divine, they do so in an “explicitly
fictional” framework that acknowledges their own potential for failure and
miscommunication of the Divine Truth, or what is “taken to be real”. In this way they can
safely claim to justify God while also avoiding Satan’s sin of self-aggrandizement, since
they do not ever argue that truth in some way originates from them. Instead, in Milton’s
conception it is the duty of creative fiction to reinterpret Divine Truth into a format that

Sullivan 37
can be understood by the fallen, experiential world, serving as the ultimate check on
Satan’s tempting lies.

Sullivan 38

Chapter 2: The Bridge that Tolkien Built
Near the end of their quest to save Middle-Earth by destroying the Ring of Power,
the hobbits Frodo and Sam encounter Faramir, who claims to be none other than the
“Captain of Gondor” (Tolkien, TT 643). In Middle-Earth, Gondor is often identified as
the chief bulwark of resistance to the evil embodied by the Ring of Power and its master,
Sauron, and as Faramir informs the two of them, the land in which they currently reside
has become a battle ground in which “only the servants of the Dark Tower [Sauron], or
the White [Gondor]” roam freely (643). So when Sam and Frodo claim that they are
“neither,” simply “travelers” in this land, Faramir’s suspicion is immediately aroused,
and he wastes no time in demanding the two Hobbits “to make haste and declare
yourselves and you errand” (643). But Frodo has learned to be wary of men, his trust in
them having been betrayed when Boromir, Faramir’s brother, the former “High Warden
of the White Tower, and [Gondor’s] Captain-General,” tries to steal the Ring in order to
wield its evil power rather than help destroy it (643). So when “four tall Men” spring out
of the forest, all of which “were like [Boromir] in stature and bearing, and in their matter
of speech,” it comes as no surprise that Frodo is reluctant to reveal his identity as the
Ring Bearer (642). Indeed, the next few chapters are all marked by a strange tension as
two parties who should be natural allies against Sauron try to determine if the other is
worthy of their trust, both aware that to misplace their faith at this critical juncture could
have disastrous consequences. They are correct, of course, for there are few instances in
Tolkien’s fictional works where misplaced trust does not lead to disaster, but what they
do not know is how groundless their mistrust of one another actually is.

Sullivan 39
There is, however, a clue early in their conversation as to the content of Faramir’s
character that Frodo misses. As Faramir presses him harder and harder to reveal the truth
of his journey and its goal, Frodo snaps, asking “You have been trying to trap me in
words, playing with me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?” But
Faramir is offended by such an accusation, responding simply “I would not snare even an
orc with a falsehood” (TT 649). Frodo doesn’t know it yet, but he could hardly have
found a nobler man in all of Middle Earth. Faramir’s rejection of lies marks him more
firmly as an enemy of Sauron than any banner ever could. Unlike Phillip Pullman, whose
works will be examined in the next chapter, the lie in LOTR is a device used exclusively
by Sauron and the agents of evil, consistently rejected by those identified with good and
adopted by those who practice evil. But Tolkien does not clarify why in his novels the lie
is so wholeheartedly condemned as a means to power, instead taking it as a point of fact
that to lie is a fundamentally malevolent act. And while the validity of such an
assumption might seem natural and self-evident to Tolkien, it is not: his belief in truth’s
unmitigated superiority to falsehood finding deep roots in his Catholic faith and his
passion for pagan literature. For although it might seem ironic for a man so dedicated to
truth in general and “Truth” with a capital “T” to be reading pagan and writing secular
fiction, for Tolkien there was no contradiction, his complex understanding of fantasy
writing through the Christian faith allowing him to address the question of “the sacred
and the profane” as well as the “real and the fictional” simultaneously (Saler 27).
Like Milton, Tolkien’s religious convictions forced him to wrestle with the
implications of “the sacred and the profane” as well as the “real and the fictional,” the
man and his stories trying to navigate between the real, sacred Truth and the profane,

Sullivan 40
fictional lie. Heavily invested in storytelling as not only an art form, but as a way to
actively participate in the divine act of creation, Tolkien saw storytelling as a supremely
powerful force that could swing one of two ways. When done correctly (a loaded term),
Tolkien believed storytelling had the power of secondary creation, allowing its
participants (reader and writer alike) to glorify and add to the beauty of the created world
by recombining pre-existing elements into new and fantastic forms. These fantasy worlds
of secondary creation did not exist in any literal sense, but as Michael Saler suggests, the
duality of consciousness cultivated by the ironic imagination made them believable
nonetheless, their rootedness in the real world allows the reader and writer to explore a
world of Secondary Creation that achieves an “inner consistency of reality” (Tolkien,
“On Fairy-Stories 139) through a “willing activation of pretense” (Saler 28). But whereas
Saler predominantly connects this concept of rootedness to a desire on Tolkien’s part to
foster a sense of realism in his imagined world, it was at least equally important for
Tolkien to foster a relationship with divine truth – a relationship he thought to be
impossible without a deep understanding of and connection with Primary Creation.
Otherwise, all attempts to use the narrative arts to glorify and add to Primary Creation, or
the world as created by God, would be in vain, such rootless tales providing nothing but
pointless flights of fancy at their best and malicious misrepresentations of reality, and
therefore God, at their worst. Thus it is against these misrepresentations of reality – these
lies against the Primary Creation of God – that Tolkien rallies, casting the stories he
loved and wrote as glorifications of God and truth though their fictional, yet accurate
representations of Secondary Worlds.

Sullivan 41
But lest it be suggested that the projects of Tolkien and Milton are analogous, it is
critical to point out that although both Milton and Tolkien share certain similarities,
Tolkien also serves as a bridge between the religious concerns of Milton and the secular
concerns of Pullman. For although Tolkien held, like Milton, that truth in its purest form
was only accessible through an impossible understanding of God, he also held great stock
in the powers of human creativity, so much so that he wrote man “may now, perhaps,
fairly guess to guess that in Fantasy he may actually assist in the effoliation and multiple
enrichment of creation” (“Fairy-Stories” 156). Thereby balancing himself between the
“dimensions of the sacred and profane,” which Saler identifies with the past, and the “real
and the fictional” which Saler identifies with the modern era, Tolkien seems to selfconsciously straddle the divide between the fiction of the past and the fantasy of the 20th
century. This is only appropriate, since the genre seems often to be defined, as Brian
Attebery suggests “not by boundaries but by a center,” with “The Lord of the Rings being
that centre by which we judge other fantasies” (12). But as it will be demonstrated, the
fantasy of J.R.R. Tolkien serves not only as a center of gravity for the genre, but the point
of its inception, as its claim to truth reaches back to writers like Milton and sets the stage
for writers like Pullman and beyond.

Tolkien’s Path to Truth

And yet Tolkien is frustratingly vague when it comes to defining what constitutes
a story “done correctly”, since he also maintained that it “could not be caught in a net of
words; for it is one of its qualities to be indescribable, though not imperceptible” (“Fairy-

Sullivan 42
Stories” 114). In his essay “Works Rooted and Uprooted,” however, Thomas Shippey
attempts to create just such a net by linking Tolkien’s well-documented appreciation of
certain stories to Tolkien’s conception of a tale’s “rootedness,” a term mentioned only
briefly in Tolkien’s published lecture “Sir Gawain and the Green Knight” (henceforth
“Sir Gawain”). In a passage that Shippey himself quotes, Tolkien seems just as perplexed
as any of his readers, admitting that “It is [not only] an interesting question: what is this
flavour, this atmosphere, this virtue that such rooted works have,” but also “not the kind
of thing about which I wish to speak today” (Tolkien 72). Indeed, Shippey laments that
“it was not [Tolkien’s] business to answer [such a question] that day —or alas, any other”
(145), but it is precisely this ambiguity that gives Shippey the space to write, setting
himself the task of “searching for this unknown quality that Tolkien saw and admired”
(146) in various other (primarily) ancient stories. But while Shippey is correct in his
assertion that rootedness as a self-contained concept does not resurface again in Tolkien’s
writings, it also seems unlikely that Tolkien, as a man so deeply committed to the truthvalue of the story, would have resigned the “distinction between the genuine and phony,
which . . . [he was] so sure of,” to a purely “inner quality” of a work outside of any
“objective criteria” (148). What seems more likely, then, is the concept of the
mythologically rooted changing and expanding over time, evolving along with the mind
that coined the term. In other words, while it might have been possible for Tolkien to
abandon the term, the concept of rootedness – “the distinction between [the] genuine and
phony” story – could never be far from Tolkien’s thoughts, manifesting themselves both
in his fictional and scholarly works.

Sullivan 43
In addition to Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Tolkien’s understanding of
Beowulf was critical to his understanding of the rooted story, the old English poem
providing an important example of the rooted story’s power. As Tolkien writes:
“The illusion of historical truth and perspective, that has made Beowulf such an
attractive quarry [of historical fact], is largely the product art. . . The lovers of
poetry can safely study the art, but the seekers after history must beware lest the
glamour of Poesis overcome them.” (“Beowulf” 7)
Tolkien mentions this semi-magical glamour of art only once over the course of
“Beowulf,” utilizing it only to steer his peers away from a reading of Beowulf as a purely
historical/ linguistic text. But in a lecture written three years later called “On FairyStories,” Tolkien is able to turn away from his defense of Beowulf’s value as a
mythologically rooted work of art towards a defense of the rooted fairy-story in general.
Expanding on the artistic principles that allow stories like Beowulf and Sir Gawain to
assume the “illusion of historical truth and perspective” that serves the artist better than
the historian, “On Fairy-Stories” attempts to define exactly what allows fiction to access
this mode of truth. For although the vocabulary of the “rooted” tale drops out of “On
Fairy-Stories,” Tolkien’s concern with the “virtue . . . that such rooted works have” does
not flag. In other words, the rooted story uses ancient myth to create an “inner
consistency of reality;” a sense that what is depicted in fantasy is not only true of the
interior world of the story, but the exterior realm of reality (“On Fairy-Stories” 139).
Although Saler would not categorize Beowulf as New Romance, it is striking to
compare what Tolkien referred to as an “illusion of historical fact” to Saler’s conception
of enchantment and the ironic imagination. As Saler writes, the “inherently ambivalent

Sullivan 44
properties of enchantment: the capacity to delight and to delude,” is what makes it so
dangerous, “the price of living with enchantment was always the possibility of being
captivated by it” (20). For although in his introduction Saler clearly excludes from his
discussion ‘“Mythological’ and ‘legendary”’ stories and characters, which possess “a
more ambiguous ontological status” compared to those that are “unambiguously marked
at the outset as ‘fictional,’” there seems to be a way in which Tolkien’s understanding of
Beowulf’s appeal is connected to Saler’s modern understanding of enchantment (6). Just
like authors that Saler equates with the proprietors of New Romance, Tolkien might
argues that the Beowulf poet presents her “fantasy realms … in a realist mode,” the
thought and deep emotion giving it the semblance of historical accuracy. Not to quote
Saler out of context, it is a much less sustainable argument to suggest that the Beowulf
poet’s fantasy realm is “cohesively structured, empirically detailed, and logically based”
to the same extent that Saler claims is indicative to writers of New Romance. The poet
did not, after all, feel compelled to include detailed maps of the North Sea, complex
genealogies for Beowulf and Hrothgar, or expansive appendices detailing the parameters
of Northern Christianity, but she did, according to Tolkien, include aspects of the real
world, as she perceived them, in her fantastic realm.
At the heart of such a claim is the rigid belief on Tolkien’s part that the genuine
fairy-story – the rooted fairy-story – was inextricably connected to the real; its fantasy
drawing power from a connection to the world at large. As far as Tolkien was concerned,
“History often resembled ‘Myth,’ because they are both ultimately of the same stuff,” the
mythical doing nothing more than borrowing the elements of history to suit its own
purposes (“On Fairy-Stories” 127). The magic of fantasy, therefore, was nothing more

Sullivan 45
than the recombination and re-handling of disparate historical, factual elements into a
cohesive whole, whether those elements be simple adjectives or motifs as ancient as the
human race. “The mind that conceived of light, heavy, grey, yellow, still, swift, also
conceived of the magic that would make heavy things light and able to fly, turn grey lead
into yellow gold, and the still stone into swift water” and in Tolkien’s mind it was in
“such ‘fantasy’, as it is called, new form is made; Faërie begins; Man becomes a subcreator” (122). Fantasy as Tolkien conceived it, therefore, was not the product of creation
proper, but that of “sub-creation;” the human ability to perceive and understand the world
around us while recombining its elements into shapes wonderful and, most importantly,
based in truth.

Tolkien’s Truth

As to what kind of truth such fictional worlds convey, the question becomes a
little thornier as Tolkien’s secular and religious investments in the story begin to merge.
For although he seems to have a clear sense of what sort of truth is captured in the story
done correctly, Tolkien never sees fit to address it in any kind of comprehensive manner.
Believing that the rooted story reflected not only the truth of the world around us but also
true aspects of the Divine, Tolkien was of the mind that by participating in the act of subcreation, human beings interacted with the Primary Creation, or the world as created by
God. As one “may now … fairly dare to guess,” Tolkien writes, “in Fantasy [one] may
actually assist in the effoliation and multiple enrichment of creation,” the recombination
of elements found in the divine work of Primary Creation actually enriching creation

Sullivan 46
itself (“Fairy-Stories” 156). Thus framed, rooted storytelling participates not only in the
truth of the real world upon which it is based, but also in the Truth of the divine Will that
created it, its convincing emulation of and creative play with the forms found in the
primary world signifying to Tolkien a deep understanding of God and his works. But
because he also believed as a Roman Catholic “that individuals could never fathom the
Lord’s ultimate intentions,” Tolkien “was wary of asserting conclusive interpretations”
about the nature of Primary Creation or the divine will that shaped it (Saler 163). Thus
his conditions for a story’s rootedness are not contingent upon the author’s Catholic faith,
or on the factual accuracy of her depiction of historic events, but upon the “keen … and
… clear … reason” of her artistry that allows her to cast the illusion of historical accuracy
found in stories like Beowulf, Sir Gawain, and, if Tolkien had his way, LOTR (“FairyStories” 144).
Tolkien did not, however, develop such an understanding in a vacuum. Indeed,
such an understanding of the story’s access to truth within the Christian framework goes
as far back as St. Augustine, one of the great Fathers of the Catholic Church. For
although Tolkien develops his own vocabulary of secondary worlds and Primary Creation
to address the issue, the unity of sentiment between himself and Augustine is striking, as
each attempts to incorporate secular storytelling into a Christian worldview.
Acknowledging Jesus’ extensive use of the fictional parable in the Scriptures, Augustine
suggests, “many pretenses are undertaken in order to truly signify one thing by means of
another” (Griffiths qtd. 103). Through the fictional story, therefore, Augustine maintains
that truth might be conveyed, since Jesus often employed “pretense … to truly signify
one thing by means of another.” Jesus is, of course, a unique case for Augustine, since as

Sullivan 47
the Son of God “what he intends to signify by his fictions [are factually] true in addition
to not being a lie,” but this by no means precludes mortal storytellers from accessing
pieces of truth through their art (103). In fact, Griffiths goes so far as to suggest that for
Augustine, “the greater [the story’s] ordered harmony, the deeper its participation in
God’s ordered harmony and the greater its merit;” the “beautiful” ordered harmony
present in stories providing nothing more than a mirror in which the ordered harmony of
God’s Creation can be accurately reflected in a fictional context (105). “For a Christian,”
or at the very least for Tolkien, “this is what all those who write good literature are doing
whether they know it or not,” their ability to realistically portray the world as she
understands it through the story placing the author in direct contact with God, whose act
of Primary Creation she is imitating (108).
But the proper handling (or re-handling) of such elements requires an immense
degree of artistry, lest any structure seeking to achieve the “inner consistency of reality”
of sub-creation collapse under its own weight. This is something that Tolkien understood
all too well, but by skimming only lightly over the surface of mythopoeia, or the right to
sub-create, it is something that Shippey fails to address. For although Shippey correctly
links Tolkien’s attraction to rooted fantasy with his appreciation of literary worlds with a
certain internal consistency, he does not follow the concept of rootedness to Tolkien’s
final conclusion:
“Fantasy can, of course, be carried to excess. It can be ill done. It can be put to
evil uses. It may even delude the mind out of which it came. But . . . the keener
and the clearer . . . the reason, the better fantasy it will make. . . For creative
Fantasy is founded upon the hard recognition that things are so in the world as it

Sullivan 48
appears under the sun; on a recognition of that fact, but not a slavery to it.”
(“Fairy-Stories” 144)
Thus the stakes of the rooted story are raised. Improperly done, the re-appropriation of
elements “as [they] appear under the sun” can lead to “evil,” as even “the mind out of
which it came” can be “delude[d]” by their pretenses of fact. But when the reason behind
such rooted stories is “keen and . . . clear,” “founded upon the hard recognition” of things
as they actually are, fantasy can achieve the opposite effect. Instead of leading its
participants, both reader and writer, into delusion, the sub-creative Fantasy founded upon
the recognition of fact can, according to Tolkien, generate its own truth, moving beyond
the recognition of fact to the revelation that its recombination is also in some way true.
This is the point where Tolkien diverges from Milton, in that he saw real value in
even secular works of fiction, looking to the convincing recombination of elements from
the Primary World as the sign of a work’s connection to God, not its religious stance. For
although Tolkien is a long way from penning the phrase “God is dead,” there is a way
that his celebration of the new is closely linked with Nietzsche’s conception of the artist.
“A painter without hands,” writes Nietzsche in “On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral
Sense,” “who wished to express in song the picture before his mind would, by means of
this substitution of the spheres, reveals more about the essence of things than does the
empirical world” (893), especially since for Nietzsche the empirical world was composed
primarily of a “movable host of metaphors” (891). For Tolkien to parrot such a doubt in
the universe’s lack of meaning would be akin to blasphemy, since Tolkien believed
resolutely that the world of Primary Creation gained credence and truth from its
relationship to God. But since such divine truth was, in the end, inaccessible to the human

Sullivan 49
mind, Tolkien found it much easier to praise a subjective, inventive form of truth while
simultaneously maintaining the hope that such invented Secondary Worlds might actually
reflect a more permanent truth. In other words, it was Tolkien’s uncertain hope that each
sphere of Secondary Creation revealed “one facet of a truth incalculably rich: finite only
because the capacity of Man … is finite,” humanity’s ability to enrich creation hinging on
their ability to think creatively and reveal another “facet of a truth incalculably rich”
through works of rooted fantasy (“Fairy-Stories” 155).
Such a claim – that the truth of rooted sub-creation is greater than the sum of its
parts – is not one to be made lightly, but at the center of “On Fairy-Stories” is the deepseated conviction that there was more at stake in the fairy-story than a convincing flight
of fancy. Understanding that “it [was] presumptuous of [him] to touch upon such a
theme,” particularly in the strictly academic setting of a lecture hall, Tolkien nevertheless
holds nothing back: as he conceived it, the writing of a rooted fairy-story was nothing
less than the creation of a Secondary World. “When the story-maker’s art” of reappropriating the elements of reality is “good enough, . . . the story-maker proves a
successful ‘sub-creator’” (132), fashioning “a Secondary World into which both designer
and spectator can enter” without suspending their disbelief or losing connection to the
world as it exists under the sun (143). This Secondary World, built by the author through
his story-maker’s art but cohabitated by himself and his audience, “does not seek
delusion, nor bewitchment or domination,” but rather “seeks shared enrichment” as the
elements of the world under the sun are recombined and re-examined in their new,
fantastic shapes (143). But because building blocks of these new shapes are rooted in
reality and mythology, Tolkien believed they transcend the realm of the strictly fictitious,

Sullivan 50
enriching the minds of the designer and the spectator through their contemplation. For
while these products of Secondary Worlds almost certainly did not in truth exist, the
rootedness of its elements could not be denied. Thus Tolkien believed that if the real
elements of the “Primary World” (142) could be convincingly re-combined within the
fictional framework of a Secondary World, it must be significant, the rootedness of a text
evidencing its inherent, if not absolute, truth.

Tolkien’s Story

As a product of the modern age, Tolkien seems to have maintained a keen
awareness that truth, as human’s could understand it, was of an inherently fractal affair;
even in fantasy one could do little better than reveal one subjective “facet of a truth
incalculably rich.” But such a choice of words belies Tolkien’s deep belief as a devout
Roman Catholic that there was such a thing as “a truth,” objective, divine, and sourced in
God, even if such a truth was beyond the comprehension of mortal man. Fantasy thus
became, for Tolkien, the only way of accessing the certainty of divine truth; the only way
of positing a subjective truth as an objective one without claiming an impossible
understanding of God. “Unlike the messy contingencies of ordinary experience,” writes
Saler, “imaginary worlds, for all their exoticism, are manageable and safe,” in that they
can establish within their fictional context a solid connection to truth that was otherwise
impossible, utilizing the power of the author to claim that if a truth was subjective truth
was subjective in the realm of Primary Creation, in Secondary Creation the author could
establish it as fact (51). Indeed, if an author of fantasy has done her job correctly, argues

Sullivan 51
Tolkien, than the subjective truths she posits as objective will illicit Secondary Belief in
her reader, the fictional frame of the narrative permitting the belief of the author to claim
connection to the divine and applicability outside the realm of the self.
This is why the lie is so vilified, as seen in the example with Faramir and Frodo
above, in Tolkien’s conception of storytelling. The distinction between the lie and the
story – between disparaging God through a willful misrepresentation of Primary Creation
and glorifying him through a thoughtful and accurate re-representation – was so thin in a
fallen world as to be non-existent. “Especially in a fallen world of fallible humanity,”
Saler argues, “ The ideal form of enchantment would delight without deluding, but
Tolkien knew the balance was difficult to maintain,” since in a fallen world there was no
easy way to differentiate between subjective truths and utter lies (184). And yet Tolkien
still maintained that such a distinction existed, even if it was almost impossible to
recognize in the real world of Primary Creation. In order to examine the difference
between the lie and the story, therefore, Tolkien needed a way to establish firmly the
boundary between truth and lie without claiming a divine access to God, or an
understanding of Primary Creation that was simply inaccessible. The answer he found,
perhaps unsurprisingly, was the story itself. In the world of Secondary Creation, such
limitations on human knowledge did not necessarily apply, since as the author of a
Secondary World Tolkien could establish any connection to the truth that he desired. In
other words, when asked “Is it true,” Tolkien could make his necessary claim to piety
with the answer “yes: it is true in that world” while simultaneously claiming that in a
stories ability to reflect the truth of Primary creation, it had the potential to be true of this
world as well.

Sullivan 52
Returning to the example of Frodo and Faramir, however, reveals further
complexities of Tolkien’s idea of rootedness and his commitment to the truth. As Faramir
accurately observes and communicates to Frodo after his first round of interrogations,
“you were not wholly frank with me,” Frodo’s reluctance to trust Faramir leading him to
tell what may be considered lies by omission in another context (654). “[Telling] no lies,
and all the truth that [he] could” (654) Frodo spins numerous half-truths around Faramir,
“[making] no answer” (648) to Faramir’s question as to Boromir’s involvement with the
Ring, just as when asked “What is Isildur’s Bane?” Frodo answers that it “is hidden”
(644), knowing full well that Isildur’s Bane is nothing less than the Ring itself. But far
from being condemned for his concealment of the truth, Faramir applauds it. The same
man that “would not snare even an orc with a falsehood” on page 646 seems to
completely reverse his position on lying over the course of eight pages, congratulating
Frodo for “[speaking] with skill in a hard place, and wisely” in his efforts to deflect his
own line of questioning (654). In other words, Frodo seeks to keep Faramir from the
truth, but far from being deemed a servant of evil, Frodo is called wise, his subtly of
speech and taciturnity evaluated as virtues, not vices.
Again, Augustine can be called in to help explain what might otherwise be
considered a contradiction in the way in which Tolkien has conceptualized the problem
of the lie. For although Griffiths makes clear that he does not wholly subscribe to
Augustine’s reasoning on the matter, he also makes clear that Augustine firmly believed
that silence could not be considered a lie. “Perhaps implausibly,” writes Griffiths,
Augustine thinks that since “Silence is … a nonverbal action, … [it] ought not to be taken
as making public what you take to be the case … [and] is therefore not duplicitous,”

Sullivan 53
unable to communicate, or “make public,” one thing with the voice and hide another in
the heart (33). In his own words, Augustine claims “It is … not a lie when the truth is
hidden by silence, but rather when what is false is expressed in speech” (qtd. 34), “the
evil proper to lying” (qtd. 26) consisting not of withholding of truth, but in bringing
falsehood to life by expressing it in an explicitly verbal act. Augustine even goes so far as
to maintain this conviction “even when it is counterintuitive to do so,” his stance on the
issue making perfectly clear that even in a case like Frodo’s, in which hiding the truth is
specifically meant to deceive the audience, the lie of omission is no lie at all (33). As was
mentioned earlier, for Augustine the lie is contingent solely on the idea of duplicity’s
double-heart, and is completely independent from of the statement’s factual accuracy or
the speaker’s intent to deceive the listener. By refusing to make public a statement that
one believes to be false, one is therefore able to avoid lying, the speaker’s intention to
deceive through omission holding no significance to a Augustinian definition of the lie.
Indeed, the conversation between Faramir and Frodo also places a heavy
emphasis on the inherent truth-value of stories, not only in the figurative, metaphorical
sense outlined by Tolkien in “On Fairy-Stories,” but also in terms of the unique, literal
sense of stories brought to life by the magic of Middle-Earth. When Frodo is able to
accurately quote the “riddling words … that Boromir brought to Rivendell,” one of the
chief cities of the Elves, Faramir is forced to admit that “It is some token of your truth
that you … know them,” the riddling words brought by Boromir not only signifying a
connection to Faramir’s brother, but a connection to the Elves, their knowledge of lore,
and their fascination with the truth (643-4). Later, after Faramir has extracted an
admission of Frodo’s omission, he also cites ancient lore to explain his own clarity of

Sullivan 54
insight, reminding Frodo that “a mighty heirloom” like Isildur’s Bane “do[es] not breed
peace among confederates, not if aught might be learned from ancient tales” (654). As
Faramir and Frodo are well-aware, the history of Middle-Earth, which is almost the same
thing as its stories, is fraught with legends of mighty heirlooms leading to unrest and
strife between allies, the most famous of which being the titular Silmarils of The
Silmarillion. In reference to the very same story, Frodo cautions Faramir that “ancient
tales teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as – heirlooms,” citing
Fëanor’s rash oath to reclaim the Silmarils at any cost, which leads to the utter
destruction of his family (654). But obscure references to the textual Silmarillion to aside,
it is clear that Faramir and Frodo both are well-versed in “ancient lore by long tradition,”
especially since they have both been tutored by the “lore-master” Gandalf, and that this
lore does not occupy the place of a fictional, frivolous story in their world, but rather
points to some element of truth in their world, the story of the Silmarils helping the
Faramir and Frodo to gain context and understanding of their own situation (655).
But Frodo and Faramir are far from the only ones in Middle-Earth that recognize
the power of stories to help explain the truth around them. As Éomer, a member of
nobility in the horse kingdom of Rohan, he chances upon three travelers so unlikely he is
forced to call into question his own understanding of the world. Confronted for the first
time not only by Aragon, the last heir of a line thought to have perished long ago, but also
by Gimli the dwarf and Legolas the elf, members of two different races which typically
harbor deep hatred against one another, Éomer is taken aback. “‘These are indeed strange
days,’ he muttered. ‘Dreams and legends spring to life out of the grass,’” and he is
absolutely right (423). For when he asks Aragon “‘Do we walk in legends or on the green

Sullivan 55
earth in the daylight?’” Aragon correctly answers “‘A man may do both,’” since in
Middle-Earth the “‘green earth … is a mighty matter of legend’” in and of itself (424).
For even though the matter of lore has fallen into a state of disrepair in the world of men,
and doubt has begun to creep over the myths and legends once held to be true, the stories
of Middle-Earth ar still, in essence, histories, as they can be relied upon time and time
again to reflect the real nature of the world in which they exist.
But such a certainty in stories comes with a price, as Éomer is also quick to point
out. ‘“It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels,”’ Éomer observes:
The world has grown strange. Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields;
… and the Sword [of the king] comes back to war that was broken in the long
ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark! How shall a man judge
what to do in such times? (427)
And although Aragon once again gives Éomer sound advice, counseling him to judge
‘“As he has ever judged,’” it is far easier said than done (428). For while it is true that the
world has not changed, just Éomer’s perception of it, it becomes easy for men to doubt in
a time of such uncertainty, the revelation that even what was thought to be impossible
might in fact be true casting the whole world of Middle-Earth in doubt, especially for
those who cannot easily distinguish between truth and lies.

Tolkien’s Conceit

This, then is Tolkien’s conceit. Even in a world where empirical truth is readily
accessible through stories, it is still difficult for fallen man to differentiate between true

Sullivan 56
stories and false lies, since to live in a world where “legends spring out of the grass”
means that anything, even what seems impossible, can be true. Nowhere in the Lord of
the Rings is this more apparent then in the battle of wills between Gandalf, who has
previously been identified as a “lore-master” and therefore, at least in the context of
Middle-Earth, a steward of the truth, and between Grima Wormtongue, who, as his name
might suggest, is a master of treachery and lies. But even though Gandalf is a powerful
wizard and warrior in his own right, Tolkien makes it clear that it is not his own strength
that allows him to defeat Wormtongue, but his commitment to truth above all things, as
Gandalf trusts to the power of truth to dispel lies to win the day.
One of the greatest examples of this form of evil deception takes shape in Grima
Wormtongue, advisor to King Théoden of Rohan. Under his malicious influence the
kingdom beings to fall apart, the lies that he spins around Théoden causing the king to act
and make decisions based not off the world around him, but the world as Wormtongue
portrays it through his false speech. Naming Gandalf “Láthspell,” or “Ill-news” (TT 502),
he seeks to send Gandalf away, recognizing in him one who might break the spells of
deceit he has put around Théoden, reversing all that his “whisperings” and “leechcraft”
have accomplished (508). As Gandalf explains to Théoden:
“Ever Wormtongue’s whispering was in your ears, poisoning your thoughts,
chilling your heart, weakening your limbs … Wormtongue played dangerously …
[and] craft[ily]: dulling men’s wariness, or working on their fears, as served the
occasion.

Sullivan 57
Poisoning his thoughts and chilling his heart, Wormtongue turned Théoden against his
own beloved nephew5, counseling caution and delay even while the enemies of Rohan
move openly across its lands. Wormtongue’s lies seem to have even weakened Théoden
physically, convincing Théoden that he has entered “his failing years;” that “old [as] he
be,” he should not “weary [him]self, or tax too heavily [his] strength” (508). Thus slowly
but surely Wormtongue plied his art, worming his way so deep into Théoden’s
confidence that he begins to trust the word of Wormtongue over his own judgment,
dulling men’s wariness or working on their fears to create a viable lie that might eclipse
by placing a higher emphasis on his words than perceived truth.
Indeed, the most insidious part of Wormtongue’s power over Théoden is just how
highly the king regards his council, favoring his lies to the truth of others, even so far as
to prefer the opinions of Wormtongue to the observable world around him. “Wearing the
mask of friendship,” Wormtongue served as councilor, feinting to serve the best interest
of the kingdom while in actually working only to weaken Théoden’s mind and ability to
rule. “But when [Gandalf] … warned [Théoden], then the mask was torn, for those who
could see,” showing to many of those closest to Théoden just how twisted and devious
Wormtongue’s council had become (510). Unfortunately, Wormtongue’s net was too
tightly woven, forcing “others [to] watch and … do nothing” while their king was fed
lies, unable to speak against the false council of Wormtongue “for [his] will was
[already] in his keeping” (510). This is the root cause of Théoden’s conflict with his
nephew, Éomer having “defied Wormtongue’s voice speaking with [Théoden’s] mouth”
that so clearly could spout nothing but lies (510). For although the text makes clear that
5

It is no coincidence that Théoden’s nephew is none other than Éomer, the prince that meets Aragon,
Legolas, and Gimli in the fields of Rohan. For although all men in Middle-Earth are susceptible to doubting
of the old stories, the men of Rohan seem particularly susceptible to such doubt.

Sullivan 58
Éomer’s council is the correct one, “to crooked eyes truth may wear a wry face,” and
under Wormtongue’s spell Théoden freely admits “my eyes were almost blind” (510).
Thus unable to distinguish fact from fiction in Grima’s councils, it is not until Gandalf
returns once more to Théoden’s halls that Wormtongue’s evil could be undone, Gandalf’s
wisdom and truthfulness proving to be the only effective weapons against so potent and
entrenched a liar.
Unlike Peter Jackson’s adaptation of the scene, there is no vague, magic mind
control on the part of Saruman with which only Gandalf can contend. Instead there is
only Grima and his seductive lies, which Gandalf must combat using nothing more than
the truth. For although Gandalf succeeds in tearing off Grima’s mask and transforming
Théoden from a man “left crouching in his chair or leaning on a stick” into one who
inspires “wonder … standing now proud and erect,” his ability to do so has little to do
with the power of wizardry, the restorative power of truth being fully responsible for the
recovery of Rohan (506). Having sat “too long … in shadows and trusted to twisted tales
and crooked promptings,” Gandalf “bid[s Théoden] come out before [his] doors and look
abroad,” asking him to trust his own powers of perception over the lies of Wormtongue
(503). Upon looking out on his kingdom, Théoden realizes that “It is not so dark here . . .
nor does age lie so heavily on [my] shoulders as some would have [me] think,” the veil of
Grima’s lies being torn away in the face of undeniable truth (504). Gandalf then precedes
to use a similar tact, despite the grim prospects of the present situation, daring to tell a
man used to honeyed lies that “If we fail [in the coming battle], we fall. If we succeed –
then we will face the next task,” in the conviction that the truth should be delivered
plainly, even if it is harsh (507). Gandalf, like Faramir, “do[es] not lie,” even though the

Sullivan 59
truth might be difficult to hear, and because he chooses to do so he wins Théoden as an
ally, breaking through the spells of despair Grima has woven around the king to keep him
immobilized (509).
But Grima too has his explanation for Théoden’s rapid transformation, unwilling
as he is to so easily relinquish the stranglehold on the court of Rohan that he has spent so
much time cultivating and maintaining. Instead of attributing it to the powers to the
powers of truth dispelling that of lies, Wormtongue claims “This wizard has bewitched
you,” implying that it is Gandalf’s magic that has won Théoden, not the righteousness of
his cause (508). But before Gandalf has a chance to defend himself, Théoden steps in,
replying “If this is bewitchment … it seems to me more wholesome than your
whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have me walking on all-fours like a beast”
(508). Unlike Gandalf, who wishes for nothing more than the willing aid of Théoden in
doing what is right, Grima thinks only in terms of domination, seeking to manipulate
Théoden into doing what Grima desires, but not what Théoden intends. In this way,
Grima is able to trick Théoden into doing what he believes is best for his people and his
health, but is actually to his detriment, the cloak that Grima casts over reality making it
seem that to Théoden he is still acting like a noble king while he is actually acting only
for Grima’s benefit. Indeed, the accusation “You lie … comes too oft and easy from [his]
lips,” deception seeming to be the only method of persuasion Wormtongue understands
(509). But in his wisdom and moral rectitude, Gandalf seems to understand that the truth
is, in the end, more powerful, the reaffirmation of what is true and real lending hope and
confidence, while the acceptance of a lie leads to despair and folly.

Sullivan 60
Just like Tolkien, it seems Gandalf does not wish for the domination of his
audience, preferring them as his ally and compatriot in the telling of his stories. And
although it would be unfair to suggest that Gandalf represents Tolkien in some allegorical
sense, especially given Tolkien’s well-documented dislike of allegory, the similarity of
opinion expressed in Gandalf’s struggle with Wormtongue and Tolkien’s struggle with
writing fantasy in a fallen world is too strong to be ignored. Like Gandalf, Tolkien seems
to have believed that the truth could speak for itself, even if it could not be communicated
directly within the sphere of Primary Creation. The truth could “be advanced with
humility and accepted as provisional” through stories, however, their fictional framework
serving as an ideal location to posit subjective truths as objective without claiming divine
knowledge or an understanding of Primary Creation that was, for Tolkien, impossible.
Gandalf has an easier time of it, of course, since the stories he tells are literally true of the
world in which he is a part, but he must also contend with stronger lies in Middle-Earth,
where anything, it seems, is possible (Saler 187). In other words, the stories in MiddleEarth, being literally true, required no ironic imagination, no suspension of disbelief, or
willing activation of pretense. They were simply true. But for Tolkien, confined to the
realm of Primary Creation, could only hope that his stories were in some way true, the
willingness on the part of his readers to engage with his fantastic pretense encouraging
Tolkien to believe that even subjectively, his stories came in contact with truth and the
divine.

Sullivan 61

Chapter 3: Grace Without God

Curious as to the creative impetus behind what have undoubtedly become Philip
Pullman’s most famous works, Claudia Fitzherbert asked the author a rather telling
question: “How much were you itching to invent alternate worlds before embarking on
Northern Lights,” the UK title for the first book of the His Dark Materials Trilogy, The
Golden Compass (“Claudia Fitzherbert)? For although the question seems innocuous
enough, it is couched in the very same language that Tolkien used to describe his own
efforts to establish Secondary Worlds, a language of world-building which has become,
for better or for worse, and to greater or lesser degrees, standard in the discussion of
fantasy and science fiction. Having written fantasy and studied a curriculum at Oxford
shaped in large part by Tolkien and his contemporaries, Pullman could hardly be unaware
of such implication. Replying in kind, Pullman explicitly links the world-building
impulse with a “Tolkien tradition” that, for the most part, was “trash.” “I wasn't itching at
all,” remarks Pullman candidly:
It took me entirely by surprise. I always took a dim view of fantasy - still do in
fact. Most of it is trash, but then most of everything is trash. It seemed to me
writers of fantasy in the Tolkien tradition had this wonderful tool that could do
anything and they did very little with it. They were rather like the inventors of the
subtle knife who used it to steal candy when they could have done much more.
This then begs the question, why adopt a fantastic style at all?
In another interview, this time with Helena de Bertodano, Pullman chalks his
improbable choice of the fantastic mode up to doing “what you’re good at” (“Devil’s

Sullivan 62
Party”). As he freely admits, “To my dismay, I’m not good at the sort of story that’s set
in everyday life. My imagination only starts to fire when talking bears come into it,” and
so he brings talking bears into the universe of His Dark Materials, the significance of
which has become much greater than his flippant remark might suggest. Because despite
his dismay in an inability to “do realism,” Pullman is forced to admit that fantasy in the
Tolkien tradition is a wonderful tool, even if very few know how to utilize it, utilizing it
himself to tell a story and “say what I thought would be true and interesting about what
it’s like to be a human being.” But as to how Pullman performs such a feat, or why
fantasy is helpful, perhaps even necessary, in his process remains unexplained, unable to
be satisfactorily conveyed in the terse, quirky format conducive to interview responses.
Like Tolkien and Milton, Pullman turns to his own fiction to describe how his own
fiction functions, utilizing the near-limitless potential of fantasy to establish a world in
which the lines between fiction and reality are examined, blurred, and redrawn. As a
committed atheist, he inevitably does not arrive at the same conclusions as Milton or
Tolkien, whose thoughts about the connection between fiction and truth were invariably
linked to an expression of the Divine, but Pullman does nevertheless maintain the faith
that between logical, rigorous fantasy and reality, a connection continues to exist. Indeed,
by removing an ineffable God from his conception of empirical truth, Pullman’s fantasies
are actually able to make a stronger claim to truth than that of his two predecessors, his
belief in the human potential to accurately perceive the world allowing him to claim that
his fantasy does the same.
This does not mean, however, that Pullman was unaware of the fictional nature of
his stories. Dismayed by his inability to write a story “set in everyday life” and even “a

Sullivan 63
little bit ashamed” by his proclivity towards fantasy, Pullman is clearly aware of the
stigmas attached to spinning impossible lies for a living, even going so far as to criticize
the practice himself, as has been demonstrated above (“Devil’s Party”). But at the same
time, Pullman also seems to admit that fantasy in the Tolkien tradition holds enormous
potential, liking it to the subtle knife which, through its ability to cut through anything,
including the fabric of space-time, is the most powerful device ever created by human
hands in the world of HDM. As to what separates the rare subtle knives of fantasy from
the far more common trash, Pullman does not explicitly say, but by examining how his
own fantasy worlds handle the problems of fictionalization, one gets the sense that
Pullman’s thoughts on the matter are far from inchoate. On the contrary, the story of
HDM is in one sense the story of its protagonist’s developing relationship with stories
themselves, learning over the course of the trilogy to negotiate the complex relationship
storytelling maintains not only to truth, but also to lies.
Lyra Belequa, later renamed Lyra Silvertongue, is a twelve year-old girl raised in
the Oxford of another world to be bold, adventurous, clever, and extremely loyal. She is
also a terrific liar, and debatably the central protagonist of Pullman’s entire trilogy.
Because unlike Milton and Tolkien, whose Augustinian leanings necessitate a flat
condemnation of lies in every and all situation(s), Pullman’s atheistic sensibilities are
divorced from such strictures, a break which allows him to come to his own
understanding of the value of truth and lies. Ironically enough, by the end of HDM
Pullman seems to echo a similarly hard-line condemnation of lies in favor of the truth,
but at least initially, the lies of Lyra (pun most certainly intended) are treated, if not
favorably, than at least as a forgivable necessity. As Lyra herself admits at the conclusion

Sullivan 64
of The Amber Spyglass, “I know I haven’t always told the truth, and I could only survive
in some places by telling lies and making up stories. So I know that’s what I’ve been like,
and I know you know it,” the complex mixture of apology and pragmatism in her
confession serving as a useful starting point in understanding the tension between truth
and lies in the text as a whole (542). For although it might seem from the above excerpt
that the distinction between acceptable and unacceptable lies is one of pure pragmatics –
acceptable when necessary for survival, unacceptable in all other cases – it is also
inextricably linked with the questions of self-awareness, grace, and an instinctual/
experiential understanding of absolute truth that Lyra must negotiate as she enters
adulthood.

Pullman’s Pretend

As one might expect, the last ten pages of the trilogy do not constitute the first
time Lyra is confronted by her proclivity towards lying. It is, however, the first time she
is able to acknowledge it herself, and the first time she is able to do so with such tact.
Near the very beginning of her journey, Ma Costa, a river gypsy who also served as
Lyra’s nurse while she was a baby, calls Lyra out for her lies, telling her she’s “got witch
oil in her soul. Deceptive, that’s what you are child” (Golden Compass 112). Perhaps
understandably, “Lyra [is] hurt” by such an accusation, especially coming from someone
whom she holds in such high regards, but she responds immediately with another lie,
claiming “I en’t never deceived anyone! You ask …” (112). As the narrator makes plain,
“There was no one to ask, of course,” since such a claim is beyond ridiculous, causing

Sullivan 65
“Ma Costa [to] laugh, but kindly. ‘Can’t you see I’m paying you a compliment, you
gosling?’ she said, and Lyra was pacified, though she didn’t understand” (112). The
reader too is given no hint as to what Ma Costa means by her “compliment,” at least in
the immediately surrounding text, but an examination of how lying is formulated in the
text as a whole reveals how critical such a passage is to understanding Lyra’s relationship
with her own lies. As this passage demonstrates, Lyra is completely unaware of herself as
a liar, not only unable to understand her own deceptive nature, but also unaware of the
power she wields over her world through such deception.
As the older, more self-conscious Lyra of The Amber Spyglass is able to admit,
there are many instances over the course of her journey in which she had to choose
between deceit and death. But in the moment, Lyra does not and cannot conceive of her
circumstances in those terms. In the grips of the General Oblation Board and, perhaps
even more dangerously, her own mother, Lyra has to lie to save her skin, but this is not
how she understands it. “Lyra clenched herself, but relaxed almost at once, as [her
dæmon6] thought to her: We’re safe as long as we pretend” (Golden Compass 280). In
this specific instance, Lyra sees pretending, not lying, as her only defense, and pretend
she does, “pretend[ing] harder than she’d ever done in her life” (281). Having come
within inches of having her dæmon surgically severed from her body only to realize her
mother is behind the organization sponsoring the procedure, Lyra’s whole world is

6

Often glossed as a “soul” in any critical discussions of HDM without the luxury of 1,300 pages to slowly
develop the concept, a dæmon is a sentient component of all intelligent life, but one that is, in Lyra’s world,
made manifest in the form of an animal intrinsically linked to its individual human. Unfortunately, Pullman
never makes clear exactly which component of intelligent life the dæmon is meant to represent, but the
gloss of “soul” has always felt deeply inadequate. It is of course possible that Pullman never had a direct
connection to a more conventional part of human consciousness in mind while developing the concept, but
in opinion of this writer “nature” might serve as a more accurate gloss, conveying something of the
ambiguous position occupied by dæmons in Pullman’s invented worlds, especially when considering Mrs.
Coulter’s interaction with her dæmon in the cave during The Amber Spyglass (8, 55).

Sullivan 66
flipped upside down, forced as she is to navigate between her dangers of the General
Oblation Board on the one hand and her mother, Mrs. Coulter, on the other. But by
pretending to be nothing more than the naïve, helpless child Mrs. Coulter expects her to
be, Lyra is able to regain control over the situation by manipulating her own mother and
playing off of her warped, but deep-rooted maternal instincts.
To be perfectly clear: as both an older Lyra and the omniscient narrator
understand, Lyra is lying to her mother in order to protect herself. It is only a younger
Lyra that names her actions “pretend,” since she lacks the self-awareness to see her
actions for what they truly are. “With every second that went past,” the narrator explains,
“with every sentence she spoke, [Lyra] felt a little strength flowing back. And now that
she was doing something difficult and familiar and never quite predictable, namely lying,
she felt a sort of mastery again,” falling into the pattern of what she does best (Golden
Compass 1281). But far from being condemned for her proclivity towards falsehood, it is
positively reinforced, as Lyra’s ability to spin a story is portrayed not only as a situational
necessity, but also a form of art. “She had to be careful not to say anything obviously
impossible;” glosses the narrator once again, “she had to be vague in some places and
invent plausible details in others; she had to be an artist, in short,” the narrator’s aside
directly connecting Lyra’s ability to deceive with artistic creativity (281). The creative
license to tell a story cannot, of course, be presumed to be a good thing, but when it is
framed as a survival instinct within the meta-narrative of Pullman’s own foray into
creative fiction, the claim becomes increasingly hard to deny, especially if Pullman can
be seen to believe that his story also maintains a connection to truth.

Sullivan 67
For not only is Lyra’s impulse to lie initially portrayed as an almost unconscious
survival instinct, nor is it only a kind of errant creative impulse: it is also directly
connected to a complex understanding of the truth. As the narrator once again makes
plain, the “sort of mastery” that Lyra feels while lying or, in her own terms, pretending, is
“the same sense of complexity and control that the alethiometer gave her,” the ability to
lie and the ability to read the alethiometer both equated to feelings of mastery, control,
and artistry (Golden Compass 281). The alethiometer, or “symbol reader” as it is often
called, is a fictional (and the titular7) golden compass that seems to magically point
towards truth instead of north, but reading it is nearly impossible, requiring a lifetime of
intense and diligent study before one is even able to ask a question, let alone understand
its response. And yet Lyra is able to access the truth the alethiometer offers almost
without effort, unconsciously understanding its complex patterns in the same way she
unconsciously understands the complex patterns of storytelling involved in lying. Being
instinctually vague in certain places, and inventing plausible details in the others, Lyra
successfully creates the illusion of truth in the same way she instinctually finds truth in
the alethiometer, and in doing so demonstrates the unconscious mastery of both empirical
truth and fictive storytelling. But while Lyra’s lies and her understanding of the truth
might seem at odds with one another, in Pullman’s world they are integrally connected,
as her ineffable understanding of truth ground her lies in the real world, allowing her lies
to gain credence and avoid condemnation.

7

Only in the U.S. The title of the first book in the trilogy is Northern Lights in the UK

Sullivan 68
Seducing a Bear

Nowhere is this connection between the unconscious understanding of truth
through the alethiometer and Lyra’s “playing pretend” more evident than when captured
by Iofur, the King of the Svalbard armored bears. It is here that she earns the name
Silvertongue, as her lies allow her to do the impossible and deceive an armored bear. As
mentioned earlier, the armored bears are different from their naked counterparts in that
they possess intelligence, the capacity for speech, and opposable claws that give them
incredible dexterity, especially with metal, but one of their most distinguishing features –
and one of the main reasons “talking bears come into [HDM]” at all – is that they cannot
be tricked. The importance of such an immunity to deceit in Pullman’s created world will
be discussed at length, but for now it serves primarily to frame the near-impossibility of
the task Lyra sets herself in attempting to beguile one. Or at least, such a task would be
impossible, if Iofur, the bear in question, acted like a bear. As Serafina Pekkala, a witch
queen of three-hundred years who often acts as a repository of knowledge and a guide to
Lyra on he quest, suggests, “When bears act like people, perhaps they can be tricked …
When bears act like bears, perhaps they can’t” (Golden Compass 317). But while such a
conceit is also important to Pullman’s fantasy world, it is also important that Lyra
understands the veracity of this suggestion, utilizing her instinctual understanding of the
truth to weave the most potent lie possible.
And yet it must again be re-emphasized that Lyra is frighteningly ignorant of her
own power, her childish innocence and barring her from a full understanding of the
brilliance and, ultimately, power of her own lie. For even as “Everything she’d heard

Sullivan 69
about the bear king added up” and she realizes that “the mighty Iofur Raknison wanted
nothing more than to be a human being,” she is unable to use such information to
consciously construct the plan and the lie she will use to exert her will (Golden Compass
353). Because even though she is able to arrive at an instinctual understanding of the
situation at the palace, Lyra is unable to fully grasp its implications:
… a plan came to her: a way of making Iofur Raknison do what he would
normally never have done …
The idea hovered and shimmered delicately, like a soap bubble, and she
dared not even look at it directly in case it burst. But she was familiar with the
way of ideas, and she let it shimmer, looking away, thinking about something
else. (334)
The plan comes to her, rather than being the result of conscious effort and experience,
and it refuses to be scrutinized, threatening to burst if Lyra “even look[s] at it directly.”
This does not detract from the extreme courage she must employ in order to see the plan
to its conclusion or the wit employed in forming an accurate conception of Iofur, just as it
has no effect on the plan’s effectiveness in manipulating the bear-king and his court.
What it does do, however, is force Lyra to rely on grace rather than understanding to
form her lying masterpiece, asking her to walk blindly into the teeth of death without any
solid conception of how she will extricate herself.
There is, however, a moment of doubt that Lyra entertains as she meets Iofur for
the first time, stunned by his incredible power. “She quail[s]” in the face of “the biggest
bear she had ever seen,” and “suddenly her idea [to deceive him] seemed too feeble for
words” (Golden Compass 336). It is in this moment that her frail soap bubble threatens to

Sullivan 70
pop, as a consciousness of what she is about to attempt almost dawns on her and
threatens to overwhelm the fragile, innate confidence upon which the success of her task
will rest. “But [as] she moved a little closer,” she sees that “He was pretending to have a
dæmon. Then she knew that she was safe” (336). Recognizing in Iofur a state she so
comfortably inhabits, her confidence is immediately restored, as she is able to
unselfconsciously meet Iofur on his level and engage him in pretense. As we see, Iofur is
no match for Lyra at her best, as she uses the same unconscious command to truth and
lies to weave an irresistible story around Iofur as she does for Mrs. Coulter, but by the
end of her tale we see the act of playing pretend slip dangerously into the realm of lying
as her innocent command of pretend almost becomes something more sinister.

Pullman’s Lies

By the end of her encounter with Iofur, Lyra’s ability to spin a story takes almost
a haunting turn as she feels the massive bear sway under her power. “The great bear was
helpless. Lyra found her power over him almost intoxicating, and if [her dæmon] hadn’t
nipped her hand sharply . . . she might have lost all her sense of proportion” (Golden
Compass 343). If there was a dark side to lying, a darker side to the manipulation of
others, we catch a glimpse of it here in Lyra who, instead of lying to save herself and
exert some control over an otherwise hostile environment, is tempted to lie for lying’s
sake. Or, perhaps more accurately, for the thrill of holding someone else under one’s
sway by consciously manipulating their own understanding of truth.

Sullivan 71
To become a conscious liar, and not an unconscious manipulator through pretend,
seems to have drastic moral repercussions within the realm of HDM. Indeed, If HDM
were to have a villain outside the hosts of heaven, Mrs. Coulter would be a fair candidate
for the job, as both her actions and other characters’ evaluations of her leads readers to
suspect, especially early on, that Mrs. Coulter is every inch the “cesspit of moral filth”
she is made out to be (Amber Spyglass 419). She is the head of the General Oblation
Board, charged with kidnapping children and performing experiments on them to cut
away their dæmons, deeply immersed within the power structures of a church that seeks
to stifle and suppress every human instinct towards love and understanding, and drugs her
own daughter to keep her prisoner. But even while she performs all these heinous crimes
without a shred of remorse, she is simultaneously and repeatedly paralleled to her
daughter Lyra, arguably the strongest candidate for HDM’s protagonist. Thus in Mrs.
Coulter lies an interesting dichotomy: torn between her inexcusably evil actions on the
one hand and her close association with Lyra, HDM’s brave, independent, and ultimately
loving leading lady, her character defies easy definitions, forcing the reader to reconsider
just how close to wickedness Lyra actually walks.
For in addition to her skillful deception, she seems to take delight in acts of
cruelty and deception, unable or unwilling as she is to alter the course her corrupt life has
taken thus far. Even her subordinates in the General Oblation Board seem to pick up on
her cruelty, their own coldness towards the act of dissecting children seeming to be
nothing in comparison to Mrs. Coulter’s barely-concealed delight:
‘Her attitude worries me….’
‘Not philosophical, you mean?’

Sullivan 72
‘Exactly. A personal interest. I don’t like to use the word, but it’s almost
ghoulish.”
‘That’s a bit strong.’
‘But do you remember the first experiments, when she was so keen to see them
pulled apart—’ (Golden Compass 274)
If Lyra’s experience with the procedure known as Intercision is any indication, Mrs.
Coulter’s “personal interest” in watching the children being torn apart from their dæmon
cannot be construed as anything other than cruelty, characterized as it is by “the panting
of men . . . [Lyra’s] own sobs, . . . [and] the wild howl of her own dæmon” (278). What is
more, the process seems to have been made less-traumatic for the children over time, “the
first model … [having] never entirely overcome the risk of the patient dying of shock, but
[having been] improved [to] no end” as the scientists of the General Oblation Board
refined their surgical techniques with practice (272). And although her proclivity towards
cruelty is evidenced in many places throughout the trilogy, it is at Bolvanger that the
reader is given the first real glimpse under her skin, revealing a much darker and crueler
person than her glimmering exterior might belie.
For although Mrs. Coulter is in some part redeemed by the end of The Amber
Spyglass, there is no avoiding the truth of Metatron’s accusation that Coulter is a “cesspit of moral filth” who, among many other crimes, has “betrayed and intrigued and
gloried in [her] treachery” (Amber Spyglass 419). Indeed, as a person who “felt a little
quiver of laughter” at the “novel” idea of “tell[ing] the truth,” Mrs. Coulter is resolutely
condemned as a liar, using her almost natural proclivity towards manipulating the truth to
manipulate the world around her (3). But the question still remains: why is it that Mrs.

Sullivan 73
Coulter is hated and condemned so unanimously throughout HDM, and Lyra is not? At
the end of Amber Spyglass, Mrs. Coulter’s penchant for lying is even called into direct
contact with Lyra’s, as the narrator notes that in lying to Iofur, “Lyra had lied … with her
words: her mother was lying with her whole life” (418). Besides a difference in
magnitude, therefore, there seems to be very little difference between the lies she tells to
survive and the lies her mother tells to succeed, except that when Lyra lies, she is loved
and when Mrs. Coulter lies, she is condemned.
The distinction is revealed, as answers classically are, in the land of the dead.
Asked to “tell [the harpy] a story . . . Lyra [feels] like she’d just been dealt the ace of
trumps,” her “mind . . . racing . . . through the story she’d told the night before, shaping
and cutting and improving and adding” to the architecture of a story that has already
proven successful (Amber Spyglass 307). But as she “settle[s] in to her story-telling frame
of mind,” the harpy somehow senses her lie, attacking Lyra with words and talons in
outrage at her attempted deceit (307). Feeling that one of her only gifts has been robbed
from her, Lyra begins to despair, since her ability to lie has on multiple occasions saved
her from destruction, but as to why her powers of storytelling have suddenly failed, or
why they are now being so flatly condemned, Lyra cannot understand. But by trying to
consciously “shape and cut and improve and add” on a story she has told before, Lyra
makes the critical mistake of consciously lying without any connection to truth, just like
her mother. In the past her lies could be dismissed as stories, since through her
serendipitous grace she had access to a truth that gave her lies meaning. Yet in the land of
the dead, on the cusp of puberty and surrendering the grace she had attained
inadvertently, she tries to access truth through experience that simply has not yet formed.

Sullivan 74
Therefore, when in the world of the dead Lyra finds herself lying self-consciously – like
Mrs. Coulter – she also finds herself being condemned, since her stories, without any
connection to truth, have finally become proper lies.
Pullman’s Grace
But such a momentary revelation on Lyra’s part does not explain the large
contexts in which Pullman sees the larger tension between unconscious grace and
knowledgeable self-awareness. Directly acknowledging his debt to Heinrich von Kleist’s
“On the Marionette Theatre” in the back matter of The Amber Spyglass, Pullman borrows
heavily from the short story in the writing of his trilogy, the clearest example being that
of Lyra’s duel with Iorek. ‘“You cannot trick a bear,’” Iorek tells Lyra one night while
sitting around the fire, and when he asks if ‘“[she] want[s] to see proof,’” he asks her to
‘“take a stick and fence with [him]”’ (Golden Compass 225). What follows is a scene
deliberately and unapologetically lifted from “On the Marionette Theatre,” in which a
friend of the narrator tells a story about his fencing match with and eventual defeat at the
hands of a bear. Lyra, like this unnamed friend, finds that the Iorek “seemed to know
what she intended before she did, and when she lunged at his head, [he] . . . swept the
stick aside harmlessly, and when she feinted, he didn’t move at all” (226). There is, of
course, a distinction to be made, since Iorek is an armored, sentient polar bear with
opposable thumbs and a peerless sense of metallurgy while the bear of von Kleist’s story
is, aside from his fencing ability, completely ordinary, but nevertheless their inhuman
skill arises from the same source. “How do you do that?” asks Lyra in frustration, her
inability to land a blow on or deceive the bear bringing her temper to a boil (226). With

Sullivan 75
his usual terseness, Iorek responds simply that it’s cause is rooted in ‘“. . . not being
human. . . . That’s why you could never trick a bear. We see tricks and deceit as plain as
arms and legs. We can see in a way humans have forgotten. But you know about this; you
can understand the symbol reader”’ (226).
The “symbol reader” to which Iorek refers is none other than the alethiometer, the
titular golden compass that seems to magically point towards truth instead of north, for
those who have the capacity to read it. But whereas this is the clearest explanation Iorek
(and, incidentally, Pullman) offers for his uncanny ability to see through deception, von
Kleist is not nearly so withholding. Once he has established the narrator’s belief in his
story, the narrator’s friend in “On the Marionette Theatre” explains ‘“that in the organic
world, as thought grows dimmer and weaker, grace emerges more brilliantly and
decisively,”’ and it is in this grace that the bear finds his skill (“Marionette Theater”). For
as the narrator’s companion makes clear, ‘“It wasn’t merely that [the bear] parried my
thrusts like the finest fencer in the world; when I feinted to deceive him he made no move
at all. No human could equal his perception in that respect,”’ the bear’s brilliant, decisive,
and ultimately inhuman grace making him impossible to deceive and, therefore, defeat. In
other words, the bear of “On the Marionette Theatre,” like Iorek and, as Iorek suggests,
Lyra, maintain access to a kind of truth through grace that is otherwise inaccessible to
humans in their fallen, self-aware state of consciousness. But unlike Milton, who laments
the loss of human innocence and the certainty he associates with a direct connection to
God, Pullman rejects unconscious grace in His Dark Materials, unable as he is to
condone a state of being entirely dependant on God. However, Pullman is not Nietzsche.
Far from embracing the instability of humanity’s fallen state and its precarious

Sullivan 76
relationship to truth, Pullman only rallies against an unconscious assumption of it, again
borrowing from von Kleist when he suggests, in no uncertain terms, that “Grace appears
most purely in that human form which either has no consciousness or an infinite
consciousness. That is, in the puppet or in the god.”
It is hard to underestimate the influence of von Kleist on HDM, an admission that
Pullman readily makes. “Everything I say in 1,300 pages,” Pullman confesses in an
interview with Claudia Fitzherbert, “is in that essay,” and indeed, in the
acknowledgements at the end of The Amber Spyglass, his debt to “On the Marionette
Theatre” in writing the trilogy is the first to be listed, even before Paradise Lost
(“Claudia Fitzherbert”). For although the fictional framework of the text is, in many
ways, a re-writing of or counter-narrative to the story of Paradise Lost, von Kleist is
essential in renegotiating that framework, especially where grace is concerned. Having
“pinched this … from ‘On the Marionette Theatre,’” Pullman explains “Kleist says we
exist on a spectrum that goes from the unconscious to the fully conscious, and once
we’ve left unconscious grace behind we can’t go back,” forced by our fallen human
nature to “go on – through life, through education, through suffering, through experience
to … wisdom.” What is more, Pullman also directly connects this insistence with forward
motion towards independent wisdom to Lyra’s own trajectory through the trilogy, citing
the loss of “her instinctive way [of reading the alethiometer] at puberty” and the “long,
painful process” of re-learning what came to her most naturally as an example of
unconscious grace lost and, eventually, regained through wisdom. “In the end,” says
Pullman, “she will do it better,” and although the reader of HDM is never made privy to

Sullivan 77
such an end state, Pullman leaves little doubt that Lyra will, like the rest of humanity,
come to wisdom after falling from grace.
Like Milton, Pullman links the concept of grace to an unshakable understanding
of empirical truth. But unlike Milton, such an understanding of truth is not connected to
an understanding of God and his will, but directly opposed to it. As Will’s father explains
to him before he dies:
There are two great powers … and they’ve been fighting since time began …
Every increase in human freedom has been fought over ferociously between those
who want us to know more and be wiser and stronger, and those who want us to
obey and be humble and submit. (Pullman, Subtle Knife 320)
Given the repeated insistence of the “cruelties and horrors all committed in the name of
the Authority8, all designed to destroy the joys and truthfulness of life” within the trilogy,
such an explanation on the part of Will’s father leaves little doubt as to which of the “two
great powers” seeks the subjugation of humanity (272). Those who believe in God –
those that believe humans should “obey and be humble and submit” in the face of an
ultimate and omnipotent Authority – are cast as the ultimate opponents of the realization
of human potential, committed as they are to the idea of reclaiming grace through a
resumption of a prelapsarian state of unconsciousness. Every step towards human
knowledge, wisdom, and strength therefore represents a step away from that initial state
of grace which is completely dependent on God, and so such people are willing to fight
“ferociously” to suppress the potential for human greatness and independence. But as
8

The Authority is, for all intents and purposes, the “God” of HDM, although he is never referred to by this
title, except by himself, and indirectly. Indeed, it is significant to Pullman’s world building that he is not
God in the traditional Judeo-Christian sense of the Creator of All, but rather an imposter, merely the first
and most powerful angel to spontaneously “condense” who tells all the other angels that he is their creator
(AS 34).

Sullivan 78
Pullman suggests in his interview, such a desire, at the very least within the world of
HDM, is misguided at best and crippling at worst, as a connection with truth can never be
reclaimed after mankind’s initial fall. For sentient life in HDM, the only course is
forward, through the opposition of those who would suppress human potential towards
the realization of grace in full consciousness.
Such a rejection of unconscious grace does not come without cost, however.
When Lyra loses her command of the alethiometer at puberty, she is understandably
distraught, since she considers reading the alethiometer “the one thing [she] could do
really well,” and her ability to do so simply “vanish[es] as if it had never come” after her
fall from grace (AS 520). But as the angel Xaphania explains, “You read [the
alethiometer] by grace … and you can regain it by hard work” over the course of “A
lifetime” (520). At first, such a proviso hardly seems like consolation at all: indeed, there
are few who would claim that it is better to achieve a goal through hard work if the exact
same result can be produced without effort, and Lyra initially baulks at the commitment
of a lifetime to the study of something that once came naturally to her. As Xaphania
makes clear, however, this new state of affairs is to be infinitely preferred:
your reading will be even better then, after a lifetime of thought and effort,
because it will come from conscious understanding. Grace attained like that is
deeper and fuller that the grace that comes freely, and furthermore, once you’ve
gained it, it will never leave you. (520)
Deeper, fuller, and more permanent than the “grace that comes freely,” the grace attained
“after a lifetime of thought and effort” seems in every way superior to Lyra’s initial state.
No longer beholden to an ineffable power beyond herself, Lyra is free to choose

Sullivan 79
independence; free to choose a path of hard-won knowledge rather than accept the course
of blind faith in a gift beyond her comprehension. And as only befits “Eve. Mother of all!
Eve, again! Mother Eve” (Subtle Knife 314), Lyra does not disappoint, resolving to study
“the books that would tell her how to read the alethiometer again” and follow the path of
wisdom to grace by rejecting innocence (Amber Spyglass 547).
But as von Kleist makes clear in his essay, the path from unconsciousness to full
consciousness – the path from puppet to god – does not lie on a linear spectrum, but on a
circle, whose beginning and end is grace. “Where grace is concerned,” writes von Kleist,
“it is impossible for man to come anywhere near a puppet. Only a god can equal
inanimate matter in this respect. This is the point where the two ends of the circular world
meet” (“Marionette Theater”). Unable to retreat backwards towards the state of
unconscious innocence as depicted in the book of Genesis, in “On the Marionette
Theatre” von Kleist depicts a humanity forced to move forward to rediscover grace, its
hopes resting in the conviction that although the eastern gates of Paradise – the gates of
innocence – are closed, the western gates of wisdom might permit humanity to re-enter
its lost seat. In von Kleist’s even more poetic terms, “now that we’ve eaten of the tree of
knowledge … Paradise is locked and bolted, and the cherubim stands behind us. We have
to go on and make the journey round the world to see if it is perhaps open somewhere at
the back,” and it is upon just such a formulation of grace that Pullman builds his world.
Despite his professed admiration for the essay, however, Pullman’s conception of
attaining grace through wisdom is not a carbon copy of von Kleist’s, as even his
interview with Fitzherbert will show. For although Xaphania demonstrates that the grace
that comes freely and the grace that comes from conscious understanding are both, in

Sullivan 80
fact, states of grace, the angel also maintains that these states are not created entirely
equal. In this way Pullman introduces a parameter into the formulation of grace that is not
found in von Kleist, his insistence that grace found through wisdom is superior to that
found unconsciously leading Pullman to the conclusion that the circular path towards and
away from grace is not entirely a closed circuit. Rather, the end point is superior to the
beginning; the effort expended to achieve independent grace at “the final chapter in the
history of the world” adding a linear element to von Kleist’s vision of a circular path back
to Paradise.
Such a conception of the path towards grace, as a combination of both circular
and linear tendencies, is not easy to visualize, as any attempt to represent such a paradox
would look like a creation out of the mind of M.C. Escher. Both progressive and cyclical,
it defies easy definition, but by examining it in terms of the cyclical and progressive
traditions to which it responds, Pullman’s concept of grace begins to pull into sharper
focus. Torn between the cyclical reaffirmation of inscrutable, divine truth in Milton and
the linear, revelatory truth advocated in Tolkien’s effoliation of creation, Pullman draws
from elements of both traditions to articulate his claim to truth. For although he does not
acknowledge Tolkien’s influence on his work as directly as he does Milton’s, Pullman
certainly does see himself as a fantasy writer engaged in the Tolkienian tradition.
Claiming “most fantasy writers in the Tolkien tradition had this wonderful tool that could
do anything and they did very little with” when asked about his proclivity towards the
“invent[ion] of alternate worlds,” Pullman casts his own world building in Tolkien’s
mold (“Claudia Fitzherbert”). Interestingly, in the same interview he calls Paradise Lost
into the same tradition, as it is “The first book [that] … really did what fantasy can do.”

Sullivan 81
In this sense Pullman borrows from both Tolkien and Milton, seeking in his fiction not to
access a more communicable facet of truth, like Tolkien, but to tap into the truth that
Milton believed existed, but could not be known or transmitted.
Borrowing from writers like Tolkien and Milton, however, is problematic for
Pullman, a self-declared atheist attempting to write in the style of two profoundly
religious men. Indeed, as Stanley Fish convincingly argues, Milton would have almost
certainly found himself on the side of “those who want [humans] to obey and be humble
and submit” in the face of an omnipotent God, a rigorous proponent of exactly what
HDM maintains is the largest remaining stumbling block to human ascension and
reclamation of grace. “For Milton,” writes Fish:
circuitous paths are vehicles of either redemption or damnation. Where a path
leads to depends on whether those who are on it believe they are striking out in
new and adventurous directions … or whether … they are trying to get back
home—that is, to a place where their strivings are unnecessary because the goals
towards which they move … are achieved in the perfect dependence of union with
the center of all being. (3)
In other words, the only path back to grace was, for Milton, through the achievement of
“the perfect dependence of union with the center of all being,” or God. “Those who set
out in the spirit of independence and adventure” like Lyra, Asriel, and the entire host of
rebels in HDM, “only assure that they will forever be displaced wanderers” condemned in
a world like that formulated in Paradise Lost to endless wandering and eventual
damnation (3). Unlike von Kleist, Milton saw the path back to grace as one of abnegation
and self-denial, not the expansion of human capacity, and unlike Pullman, Milton thought

Sullivan 82
the path back to grace would be a perfect circle as humanity finds itself redeemed and
standing in the exact same place as Adam and Eve before the fall. The question then
becomes, to what end does Pullman incorporate Milton’s concept of truth into his own?
In Tolkien the connection is perhaps easier to understand. Believing that through
the act of storytelling, particularly in the fantastic mode, “one may actually assist in the
effoliation and multiple enrichment of creation,” Tolkien saw his work as an expression
of divine, empirical truth, or at least one facet of it (“Fairy-Stories”156). This differs
drastically from Milton who, as it has been shown, possessed a much more uneasy
relationship with the truth-value of his own fiction in a fallen world. For although both
Milton and Tolkien saw their fiction as an attempt by fallen man to access God and
absolute truth, only Tolkien believed he had actually done so, his faith in the construct of
a properly rooted, Secondary World and its connection to some aspect of Primary
Creation allowing him to establish a solid, but pluralistically modern relationship with the
truth. Milton, for whom a connection to truth was founded on nothing more than an
impossible understanding of God’s divine will, was not so fortunate, forced as he was by
his own belief in a single, ineffable truth to admit that he could never be absolutely
certain he had achieved it. As Fish remarks, to Milton “one result of [the initial]
disobedience is that the center [of the circular path] is no longer readily identifiable,” (4)
since “the vision of those who would rediscover it is irremediably darkened, so that a
person’s conviction that he is on it and others … are not can never be supported by
independent evidence and can always become the matter of doubt” (5). Thus unable to
support “by independent evidence” that one’s fiction has any connection with truth and
therefore the path back to God and grace, Milton’s work “can always become a matter of

Sullivan 83
doubt,” especially for the author, as she can never be sure she is accessing the unified
truth that cannot be absent, but cannot be perceived.
To make my circuitous point: Pullman, in conception of his own work’s
connection to truth, combines the strengths of both Tolkien’s and Milton’s ideas. By
removing God from his own atheistic worldview, he is able to eradicate the doubts of
both his forerunners, Pullman’s lack of faith in any kind of divine truth ironically making
his own claim to truth that much stronger. In his belief that ultimate understanding is
hard-won – that “every advance in human life, every scrap of knowledge and wisdom and
decency have been torn by one side from the teeth of the other” – Pullman aligns himself
with Tolkien and the idea that truth is revealed slowly, one facet at a time (Subtle Knife
320). But unlike Tolkien, Pullman seems to see these individual truths as adding up to
something larger, each facet that is revealed adding to human knowledge and wisdom and
decency until, in the final chapter of history, the sum of the parts equal a whole. This is
where Milton, supplemented by von Kleist, re-enters the picture; the place where
Milton’s faith in an end goal (which is was also the initial starting point) is rewarded as
humanity finally re-enters the state of grace it left behind at its inception. Von Kleist
suggests that this will only come about through the continued expansion of human
knowledge, whereas Milton maintains firmly that such a belief is only selfaggrandizement and ultimately sinful, but where they both agree is that the path back to
grace is circular, the goal of mankind being to re-establish what was lost. It is here that
Pullman disagrees. Seizing on his own resolute atheism and Tolkien’s tradition of
fantasy, Pullman maintains that re-claiming grace through the slow but determined effort
to reveal truth will make it even better than before, especially since it no longer has any

Sullivan 84
connection to God. Thus truth for Pullman becomes knowable, not only in its many
facets, but also in its eventual entirety, the belief that grace can be reclaimed through
ignorance and faith in God being the only thing keeping humans from becoming gods
themselves.

Sullivan 85

Conclusion

If fantasy is not a lie, what is? At the heart of my project lies this fundamental question
and all the assumptions that go with it, taking from its very onset the defensive position
that fantasy stories are more than the sum of their fictitious parts. It is a conviction that I
have held reluctantly in the past and am currently reluctant to let go, and so I have chosen
my primary texts accordingly, seeking to find in their own works some kind of
confirmation that the stories I have swallowed since my childhood are not, in fact,
worthless. But this, of course, is easier said than done, since it seems that even those most
dedicated to the propagation of these stories are not entirely certain of their own value,
the most skilled storytellers possessing an acuity of thought that forbids them from either
fully endorsing or condemning their work as a whole. Instead, these storytellers, unable
as they are to fit their works into the rough dichotomy between truth and lie, are forced to
take a third path. For although such fantasies cannot be wholly true because they are not,
in the strictest sense, depictions of actual events, they are also not lies, since buried
within their hollow exteriors lie truths that cannot be denied.
And yet fantasy is not true. Everyone knows this, especially the authors that churn
it out for a living. As Tolkien once so eloquently put it in On Fairy-Stories, “If men
really could not tell the difference between frogs and men, fairy-stories about frog-kings
would not have arisen” (“Fairy-Stories” 144). Instead of “Morbid Delusion,” which
might include the work of people crazy or twisted enough to believe that the impossible
scenarios they write or espouse are in some way verifiably true, fantasy in the Tolkienian
sense is the product of a powerfully rational mind, one which can simultaneously believe

Sullivan 86
in the importance of its writing while acknowledging its fictional nature. But of course,
such an assumption only begs the question, what is the importance of such writing? Why
on God’s green earth is it necessary to write in the fantastic mode when non-fiction can
make such a stronger claim to truth?
A friend of mine (who’s friendship is now under serious consideration) told me
once while drunk that fantasy was a pointless endeavor. Well, to be fair, she said that
fiction was a pointless endeavor, since there was no point delving into imagined worlds
while the real one still held so many things to offer. Why watch Star Trek, she said, when
one can simply go to a planetarium and learn something relevant about the space around
us? Why enjoy the way in which people interact in The Lord of the Flies when you can
watch Survivor and enjoy how real people on a real island interact? As I sputtered and
choked on my own drink, I realized I was at a loss for words. An indignant “Just
because” or “You’re stupid” clearly would not win me the argument here, and yet I had
no real response besides incredulousness.
How could I have explained to her that fantasy and fiction are so much more than
the sum of their fictitious parts; how could I have made her understand that fantasy offers
us a so much more than an enthralling diversion or escape from a world that is already so
interesting? The answer, as it turns out, was delightfully simple, and if I do say so myself,
deliciously ironic: I should have told her a story. I could have told her the story of a blind
man who, despite his belief that it was unequivocally true, decided to re-write the biblical
story of Genesis, casting it into the frame of an ancient epic in order to “justify the ways
of God to men” and bring into the realm of logic and experience what had previously
been a matter of faith (I. 26). I could have told her the story of a man at the end of a war

Sullivan 87
and the dawn of a new era who believed so resolutely in the truth the greatest stories told
that he simply had to write one himself, using a story to make literal his claim that stories
could help humanity interpret and make sense of the world around it. I could have even
told her, if by this point she had not run away in terror or fallen asleep in boredom, the
story of a crotchety atheist who, near the end of the 20th century, once again rewrote the
story of Genesis in order to expose God as a tyrant and a fraud, tearing down the old
order only to replace true, experiential storytelling as the path to salvation and grace. In
all three of these stories my protagonists would have been venerable, well-educated
English gentlemen, and all three of them would have been convinced that their
storytelling conveyed a truth that no other mode of writing could hope to convey.

Sullivan 88
Works Cited
Attebery, Brian. Strategies of Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1992. Print.
Blake, William. “The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.” Teskey 389.
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton, 2000. Print.
Empson, William Empson. Milton's God. Norfolk: New Directions, 1961. Print.
Fish, Stanley Eugene. How Milton Works. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard UP,
2001. Print.
Griffiths, Paul J. Lying: An Augustinian Theology of Duplicity. Grand Rapids: Brazos,
2004. Print.
"intuitive, adj. and n." OED Online. Oxford University Press, March 2014. Web. 26 April
2014.
"justify, v." OED Online. Oxford University Press, March 2014. Web. 26 April 2014.
Lewis, C.S. “A Preface to Paradise Lost.” Teskey 437-438.
Milton, John. Paradise Lost: Authoritative Text, Sources and Backgrounds, Criticism.
Ed. Gordon Teskey. New York: W.W. Norton, 2005. Print.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. "On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense." Trans. Daniel Breazeale.
1979. The Rhetorical Tradition: Readings from Classical Times to the Present.
Ed. Patricia Bizzell and Bruce Herzberg. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin's,
1990. 888-96. Print.
Pullman, Philip. The Amber Spyglass. London: Scholastic, 2001. Print.
- - -. "Claudia Fitzherbert Talks to Philip Pullman." Interview by Claudia Fitzherbert.
Literary Review: n. pag. Literary Review. Web. 25 Apr. 2014.

Sullivan 89
- - -. The Golden Compass. Rev. Knopf trade pbk. ed. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2002.
Print.
- - -. "I am of the Devil's party." Interview by Helena De Bertodano. The Telegraph. N.p.,
29 Jan. 2002. Web. 25 Apr. 2014.
- - -. The Subtle Knife. New York: Knopf, 1997. Print.
Shelley, Percy Bysshe. “Prometheus Unbound.” Teskey 393.
Shippey, Thomas. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton, 2002. Print.
Shippey, Tom. "Tolkien and the Appeal of the Pagan: Edda and the Kalevala." Tolkien
and the Invention of Myth: A Reader. Ed. Jane Chance. Lexington: UP of
Kentucky, 2004. 145-62. Print.
Tolkien, J. R. R. "Beowulf: Monsters and the Critics." 1936. The Monsters and the
Critics, and Other Essays. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London: Allen & Unwin,
1983. 5-48. Print.
- - -. "Interview with J.R.R. Tolkien." Interview by Dennis Gerrolt. News from Bree. Ed.
Hartley Patterson. 12 Sept. 2010. Web. 26 Apr. 2014.
- - -. The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien: A Selection. Ed. Humphrey Carpenter and Christopher
Tolkien. Boston: Houghton, 2000. Print.
- - -. The Lord of the Rings. Comp. Douglas A. Anderson. One volume ed. Boston:
Houghton, 1994. Print.
- - -. "On Fairy-Stories." 1939. The Monsters and the Critics, and Other Essays. Ed.
Christopher Tolkien. London: Allen & Unwin, 1983. 109-61. Print.
- - -. The Silmarillion. New York: Ballantine, 1979. Print.

Sullivan 90
- - -. "Sir Gawain and the Green Knight." 1953. The Monsters and the Critics, and Other
Essays. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London: Allen & Unwin, 1983. 72-108. Print.
Von Kleist, Heinrich. "On the Marionette Theater." Trans. Idris Parry. Southern Cross
Review. Web. 30 Apr. 2014.

