Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2016

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2016

The Portrait of the Artist in a Mirror: The
Refraction of Joyce in Nabokov's Fiction
Rebecca Frances Dangoor
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Dangoor, Rebecca Frances, "The Portrait of the Artist in a Mirror: The Refraction of Joyce in Nabokov's Fiction" (2016). Senior Projects
Spring 2016. Paper 15.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2016/15

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2016 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

The Portrait of the Artist in a Mirror:
The Refraction of Joyce in Nabokov’s Fiction

Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Rebecca Frances Dangoor

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2016

To my father and mother,
in appreciation

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
To Stephen Graham,
Thank you for your unwavering support and brilliant wisdom. The first class that I took
with you, “Poetry and Aesthetics in Victorian England,” inspired me to become a
literature major. I will always cherish everything you taught me as a teacher, advisor, and
senior project advisor.
To David Shein,
Thank you for teaching me that letting go does not necessarily mean saying goodbye. I
owe these last four years to you.
To Jim Keller,
I will always be grateful for the new perspectives you have given me as a writer, tutor,
student, and person.
To Deirdre d’Albertis,
Thank you for your encouragement in the classroom, in colloquium, and beyond.
To all of my Bard professors,
For guiding me on the path to becoming an innovative literature student, a sophisticated
writer, and a cultivated thinker, thank you for the incomparable lessons and intellectual
challenges.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................................................1
I · The Hungarian Football Team ..................................................................................................................... 1
II · Strong Opinions .......................................................................................................................................... 2
III · Dedalus and the Bard ................................................................................................................................ 5
IV · Art for the Sake of Art .............................................................................................................................. 6
V · Creative Artists ........................................................................................................................................... 8

PART I · THE WILL IN THE WORD: The Hamlet Complex ............................................................11
I · Taking the Will out of the Way: The Reincarnation and Exorcism of Shakespeare in Ulysses.............14
II · Shades of Hazel: Child as Ghost and Creator in Pale Fire ..........................................................24

INTERLUDE · DOLORES HAZEL SHADE: Two Works by Hazel Brown .......................................37
PART II · METAPHYSICAL CHECKMATE: Scenes on Killer Street and Grimm Road ....................45
I · A Grimm Kill ............................................................................................................................................. 48
II · That Lolita, This “Lolita” ......................................................................................................................... 49
III · The Man in the Mirror............................................................................................................................. 53
IV · Hegelian Synthesis .................................................................................................................................. 57
V · Quilty or Not Quilty? ............................................................................................................................... 59

CONCLUSION ..............................................................................................................................63
WORKS CONSULTED ................................................................................................................67

1

INTRODUCTION
I
The Hungarian Football Team

In Paris on February 11th, 1937, Gabriel Marcel, in the midst of organizing a series of
lectures, received an untimely call. The scheduled speaker that day, Jolán Földes, a Hungarian
writer fresh from her French bestseller, had suddenly fallen ill. With only a few hours before the
event, Marcel scrambled to discover a replacement. A speaker was found and in anticipation of a
disgruntled audience, a troop of people was mustered to save the stand-in the embarrassment of
speaking to a room of empty chairs. Surely enough, come five o’clock, at the Salle Chopin, when
the Russian writer began his impromptu Pushkin lecture, the maelstrom of disappointed,
shuffling feet thundered. The house almost completely emptied, but “a source of unforgettable
consolation [for the speaker] was the sight of Joyce sitting, arms folded and glasses glinting, in
the midst of the Hungarian football team.”1
The man was Vladimir Nabokov. The night verged on historic. Nabokov had written to
Joyce four years earlier:
I have been invited by a prominent Russian (émigré) firm of
publishers to translate for them your Ulysses. I need hardly say that
I am a great admirer of your work, and thus should be happy to
undertake this translation. It would seem to me, moreover, that the

1

Nabokov, Strong Opinions 86.

2
Russian language can be made to convey in a most subtle way the
musical peculiarities and intricacies of the original.2
The translation never reached fruition; Nabokov and Joyce never met. For the first time, two of
the greatest literary minds of the 20th century were in the same room, separated only by a stage
and a sports team. It took another two years for the Russian and the Irishman to come face to
face.
Details of the highly anticipated meeting do not seem to live up to expectations. Nabokov
recollects: “another time my wife and I had dinner with him at the Léons’ followed by a long
friendly evening of talk. I do not recall one word of it but my wife remembers that Joyce asked
about the exact ingredients of myod, the Russian “mead,” and everybody gave him a different
answer” (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 86). However, one unforgotten anecdote is that Joyce gave
Nabokov a copy of Haveth Childers Everywhere, one of the published fragments that would
become Finnegans Wake.3

II
Strong Opinions

Unfortunately for Joyce, Nabokov did not take well to Finnegans Wake. In fact, he
“detest[ed] Finnegans Wake in which a cancerous growth of fancy word-tissue hardly redeems
the dreadful joviality of the folklore and the easy, too easy, allegory” (Nabokov, Strong Opinions
102). In a different interview, Nabokov proclaimed:

2

Killeen 15.

3

Boyd, Russian Years 504.

3
the unfortunate Finnegans Wake is nothing but a formless and dull
mass of phony folklore, a cold pudding of a book, a persistent snore
in the next room, most aggravating to the insomniac I am. Moreover,
I always detested regional literature full of quaint old-timers and
imitated pronunciation. Finnegans Wake’s façade disguises a very
conventional and drab tenement house, and only the infrequent
snatches of heavenly intonations redeem it from utter insipidity. I
know I am going to be excommunicated for this pronouncement.
(Strong Opinions 71)
Despite using the word “detested” three times to describe his disdain for Finnegans Wake, he
lists Joyce as one of his favorite writers when he was between the ages of 20 and 40.4 In fact, in
an interview, he said: “my greatest masterpieces of twentieth century prose are, in this order:
Joyce’s Ulysses; Kafka’s Transformation; Biely’s Petersburg; and the first half of Proust’s fairy
tale In Search of Lost Time” (Strong Opinions 57). The same man who compared one of Joyce’s
works to cancer ranks Ulysses as the greatest masterpiece of his lifetime. Perhaps, there is no
topic on which Nabokov held such “strong opinions.”
Nabokov rejected the idea that he had been influenced by any writer, but his refutation of
his works having shades of Joyce is particularly fervent. In countless interviews, he was typically
prodded to acknowledge Joyce’s presence in or inspiration for his works; to each interviewer, he
flatly refused the notion. A quintessential example of Nabokov responding to an interviewer on
the subject of Joyce goes as follows:
What have you learned from Joyce?
Nothing.
Oh, come.
James Joyce has not influenced me in any manner
whatsoever. (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 102-103)

4

Nabokov, Strong Opinions 43.

4
Without question, Nabokov shares many of the characteristically Joycean traits, which one
interviewer summarizes as “word play, punning, parody” (Strong Opinions 151). But, in regards
to the first claim, Nabokov insists that he “played with words long before read[ing] Ulysses”
(Strong Opinions 151). To the second, he maintains that Joyce’s “real puns are in Finnegans
Wake” and seeing as Nabokov found the work to be a “tragic failure and a frightful bore,” which
he even had trouble finishing,5 he in no way was influenced by the book. And to the third, he
diminishes Joyce’s use of parody as inconsistent since Ulysses’ parodies range from “jejunish” to
“highly successful” (Strong Opinions 76). Accordingly, its erratic parodies cannot be the source
of that characteristic in Nabokov’s works.
The more Nabokov opposes Joyce’s influence on himself, the less persuasive he appears.
This is especially true as Nabokov ranks him a genius. His dismissal of Joyce’s effect on specific
works is more convincing than his insistence that Joyce and Ulysses have had no influence on
him as a writer in general. The following quotation comes from a 1966 interview with Alfred
Appel, Jr.:
APPEL

To what extent are you consciously “answering” Joyce in Pale Fire,
and what are your feelings about his esthetic stance—or alleged
stance, because perhaps you may think that Stephen’s remark
doesn’t apply to Ulysses?…When in Canto Two John Shade
describes himself, “I stand before the window and I pare/My
fingernails,” you are echoing Stephen Dedalus in A Portrait of the
Artist as a Young Man, on the artist who “remains within or behind
or beyond or above his handiwork, invisible, refined out of
existence, indifferent, paring his fingernails.”

5

Nabokov, Strong Opinions 74.

5
NABOKOV

Neither Kinbote nor Shade, nor their maker, is answering Joyce in
Pale Fire…The phrase you quote is an unpleasant coincidence.
(Nabokov, Strong Opinions 70-71)
In the same conversation, Nabokov said: “I finished Finnegans Wake eventually. It has no inner
connection with Pale Fire” (Strong Opinions 74). Nabokov told an interviewer that by the time
he read Ulysses, he was already “definitely formed as a writer and immune to any literary
influence” (Strong Opinions 71). Returning to this defense, he told another one that he read
Ulysses only “when [he] was already well formed as a writer and reluctant to learn or unlearn
anything” (Strong Opinions 103). The question of whether or not one can become “immune
to…literary influence” cannot be answered so simply. But, the idea that at one point Nabokov
was not immune is perhaps more intriguing to pursue.

III
Dedalus and the Bard

If there was a time before Nabokov was “formed as a writer,” surely it must have been in
his boyhood when he was “a perfectly normal trilingual child in a family with a large library”
(Nabokov, Strong Opinions 43). In one interview, he recollects:
By the age of 14 or 15 I had read or re-read all Tolstoy in Russian,
all Shakespeare in English, and all Flaubert in French—besides
hundreds of other books. Today I can always tell when a sentence I
compose happens to resemble in cut and intonation that of any of
the writers I loved or detested half a century ago; but I do not believe
that any particular writer has had any definite influence upon me.
(Strong Opinions 46)

6
Here, Nabokov sets a trap for himself. How can he acknowledge the vast amount of works with
which he engaged at such a young age and yet deny the influence that any of their writers have
had on him?
His dismissal of the influence of any, and there for all, writers becomes especially
contradictory with Shakespeare. He famously believes that “Pushkin’s blood runs through the
veins of modern Russian literature as inevitably as Shakespeare’s through those of English
literature” (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 63); as Nabokov has contributed to both modern Russian
and English literature, surely the blood of Pushkin and Shakespeare can be felt in his works.
Moreover, he proclaims that “every Russian writer owes something to Gogol, Pushkin, and
Shakespeare” (Strong Opinions 151). For a man who claims “not [to be] one to provide much
sport for influence hunters,” the game seems especially engaging (Strong Opinions 152).

IV
Art for the Sake of Art

Concerns about literary influence inevitably lead to investigating the meaning of art and
its boundaries. To Nabokov, art almost defies definition. Nabokov cannot be identified as an “art
for art’s sake” aesthete; the slogan’s very syntax, rather than focusing on the intrinsic value of
art, considers it as a means to an end. Ultimately the phrase is meaningless “unless the term art
be defined” (Nabokov, Dear Bunny 240). It is “art for art’s sake” and not art for the sake of art.
Nabokov believes,
A work of art has no importance whatever to society…Although I
do not care for the slogan “art for art’s sake”—because
unfortunately such promoters of it as, for instance, Oscar Wilde and
various dainty poets, were in reality rank moralists and

7
didacticists—there can be no question that what makes a work of
fiction safe from larvae and rust is not its social importance but its
art, only its art. (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 33)
Lolita, framed with that very debate in its Foreword and Afterword, is Nabokov’s art manifesto.
We open to Ray’s definition of art as a catalyst for social change, and we close with Nabokov’s
view of art as a kind metafiction—contaminating self-referentiality with artifice. He begins his
Afterword,
After doing my impersonation of suave John Ray, the character in
Lolita who pens the Foreword, any comments coming straight from
me may strike one—may strike me, in fact—as an impersonation of
Vladimir Nabokov talking about his own book. A few points,
however, have to be discussed; and the autobiographic device may
induce mimic and model to blend. (Nabokov, Lolita 311)
Here, he complicates the authorial hierarchy. His Afterword “mimic[s]” the Foreword by
copying the fictional John Ray. And, yet, as he is the real author, he is simultaneously the
“model.”
To Nabokov, any work of fiction that fits his aesthetic sensibility—any work that he
views as art—is poetry. When asked about the boundaries of prose and poetry, he explains that
“poetry, of course, includes all creative writing” (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 44). The key word
here is “creative.” Creative writing exhibits the virtues of art—“originality, invention, harmony,
conciseness, complexity, and splendid insincerity” (Strong Opinions 161). If Lolita is his
manifesto, Pale Fire is its epilogue. He knights John Shade, the poet of Pale Fire, as “by far the
greatest of invented poets” (Strong Opinions 59). Shade personifies the artifice and poetics of
Nabokovian art.

8

V
Creative Artists

Expanding his notion of a creative artist, Nabokov says that “a creative writer must study
carefully the works of his rivals, including the Almighty [being the epitome of a creative artist].
He must possess the inborn capacity not only of recombining but of re-creating the given world”
(Nabokov, Strong Opinions 32). The other category of artists is the “derivative write[r]” who
rather than re-creating, “imitate[s] many others, past and present. Artistic originality has only its
own self to copy” (Strong Opinions 95).
This project will consider the idea of the creative artist in Nabokov’s works. How does he
achieve “artistic originality” in “the given world” which inhabited both William Shakespeare and
James Joyce? To seek an answer to this question, we will begin by examining the presence of
Shakespeare in Joyce’s Ulysses and Nabokov’s Pale Fire, paying special attention to the Bard as
the archetypal artist and the ways in which Joyce and Nabokov re-create him. We will then
briefly establish Shakespeare as the link between Pale Fire and Lolita and how he underscores
the creative differences between Humbert Humbert and Clare Quilty. We will then turn to Lolita,
exploring the simultaneous emergence of Humbert as a creative artist and the transposal of his
artistic failures onto Joyce.
Nabokov “never liked A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. [He] find[s] it a feeble
and garrulous book” (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 71). His rejection of Joyce’s book resurfaces in
Despair when the narrator considers titling his manuscript “The Portrait of the Artist in a

9
Mirror,” only to dismiss it as “too jenjune,6 too à la mode” (Nabokov, Despair 201). It appears
once more when Humbert says, “the portrait of the artist as a younger brute” (Nabokov, Lolita
262). Lolita realizes the discarded title, “The Portrait of the Artist in a Mirror,” by painting a
portrait of Joyce through Nabokov’s mirror—a portrait of his rival, refracted into “a younger
brute.”

6

An adjective used to describe some of Joyce’s parodies (See Strong Opinions, p. 76).

11

PART I
T HE W ILL IN THE W ORD :
The Hamlet Complex7
The fact is that every writer creates his own
precursors. His work modifies our conception
of the past, as it will modify the future.
JORGE LUIS BORGES

7

Bloom, Anxiety xxii.

13

PART I

T HE W ILL IN THE W ORD :
The Hamlet Complex8
As Harold Bloom rightly reminds us, “[o]ne cannot think through the question of
influence without considering the most influential of all authors,”9 William Shakespeare. Any
investigation of “the anxiety of influence,” to borrow a phrase from Bloom, necessitates
Shakespeare—so too must our discussion begin with the Bard. Both Joyce and Nabokov return
to that very past on the way to achieving originality for their works in the present. They seek to
write out from under Shakespeare’s shadow by writing him into those very works.
Let us ruminate on the anxiety itself—and why Shakespeare is the nucleus of such a
conversation. The “anxiety of influence” is both the fear that literary history prevents one from
creating something novel, and the means by which a writer overcomes it. In grappling with the
ghosts of the past, artists reimagine, reinvent, and rewrite history, and in doing so, reclaim the
literary tradition for themselves. Why Shakespeare? Shakespeare is Literature. He wrote our
tradition; he wrote our reality. He is the Creator; he created us. Shakespeare prevents any artist
from “bury[ing] him, or escap[ing] him, or replac[ing] him.”10 We are fated to re-create that
which Shakespeare has already invented. However, by re-creating Shakespeare—by rewriting

8

Bloom, Anxiety xxii.

9

Bloom, Anxiety xiii.

10

Bloom, Anxiety xviii.

14
him into our own narratives—we can create out from under him. To Nabokov, Hamlet is
“probably the greatest miracle in all literature.”11 Both Nabokov and Joyce allude to Hamlet
more than any other of Shakespeare’s works and it is the play to which they both turn in order to
each reclaim the Bard for himself.

I
TAKING THE WILL OUT OF THE WAY:
The Reincarnation and Exorcism of Shakespeare in Ulysses

If every page of James Joyce’s Ulysses is consumed by a surfeit of literary allusions, can
his work be original or can it only be derivative of those to which he alludes? The most perennial
forefather who materializes on Ulysses’ leaves is, of course, William Shakespeare, “a ghost, a
shadow now” (Ulysses 9.478-479), whose legacy still haunts literature. The question of whether
or not we can write out from under Shakespeare’s “shadow” goes to the heart of James Joyce’s
Ulysses. Rather than assimilating his work to that of the Bard as the mighty progenitor, Joyce
turns Ulysses into a vehicle to usurp Shakespeare’s standing as the archetype of the artistic father
or creator. By assuming each role of the Hamlet trinity, evolving into a consubstantial trinity, and
possessing each facet of reproductive power by blending the dichotomy of phallus and vagina,
Bloom supersedes the Dedalus “Shakespeare” as the epitome of the artistic creator.

11

Unpublished note from Russian survey lecture course; cited in Boyd, American Years 100.

15
As Stephen chronicles Shakespeare, the man, in “Scylla and Charybdis,”12 the parallels
between Shakespeare and Bloom biographically overshadow those between the Bard and
himself. In the proceeding chapter, Bloom reflects,
High on Ben Howth…Wildly I lay on her, kissed her: eyes, her lips,
her stretched neck beating, woman’s breasts full in her blouse of
nun’s veiling, fat nipples upright. Hot I tongued her. She kissed me.
I was kissed. All yielding she tossed my hair. Kissed, she kissed me.
(Ulysses 8.911-916)
As Ben Howth is the hill that dominates Dublin Bay’s northeast headland, the setting
underscores the transferal of sexual power from Bloom, the male, to Molly, the female. The
staccato syntax highlights that very yield. Bloom remains in control of both the sexual
relationship and the syntax in, “[h]ot I tongued her,” in which he acts as subject and Molly acts
as object. They switch roles in the following sentence, “[s]he kissed me.” Although Bloom
regains his space as the subject in “I was kissed,” the use of the passive voice eliminates his
agency and hides the fact that Molly is a “her” and a “she” from the image. In that sense, it is in
the third sentence that Molly usurps Bloom’s role as the male. When the narrative returns to
Stephen in the following chapter, Dedalus states that “[Shakespeare] was overborne in a
cornfield first (a ryefield, I should say)” (Ulysses 9.456-457). Stephen’s allusion to Shakespeare
being subdued by his wife’s sexual aggression, notably outside, links the corporeal Shakespeare
to Bloom and his being “overborne” on Ben Howth.
It is important to note that the cornfield and Anne’s adultery are historically spurious.
Stephen bases all of his suppositions on the plot of Hamlet and perhaps, some apocryphal stories
that Frank Harris, among others, repeated as fact. Of course, this is then a typical example of

12

Homeric chapter titles will be used for convenience. Joyce removed them from his work.

16
Joyce’s appropriation of Shakespeare. The portrait he paints of the Bard is ultimately his own
fiction. Re-writing his own version of Shakespeare provides Joyce with the means to eclipse him.
Returning to Stephen’s fabrications, the parallels between Bloom and Shakespeare
through women continue on the psychological level. Just as Anne’s emasculation of Shakespeare
sexually and through adultery causes his “belief in himself [to be] untimely killed” (Ulysses
9.455-456), so too does Molly’s overpowering of Bloom on Ben Howth and in her adulterous
behavior leave Bloom diffident. When his thoughts turn to Molly and Boylan, he thinks “will
happen, yes. Prevent. Useless: can’t move…Lips kissed, kissing, kissed” (Ulysses 4.447-450).
He syntactically expunges himself from the active position of a grammatical noun. Rather than
“[I will] prevent. [I am] useless,” Bloom’s lack of belief in himself expels him into the passive.
Being emasculated by Anne, Shakespeare “will never be a victor in his own eyes” (Ulysses
9.457). By deeming himself to be “useless,” Bloom too “will never be a victor in his own eyes.”
Perhaps the most impregnated link between Shakespeare and Bloom is the death of each
man’s only son. Bloom muses on “his good lady Marion that had borne him an only manchild
which on his eleventh day on live had died” (Ulysses 14.266-267). In the same chapter, Bloom
thinks that his son Rudy “would be eleven now if he had lived” (Ulysses 14.418-420). The
repetition of the number eleven unequivocally stems from the death of Hamnet, Shakespeare’s
only son, his “only manchild,” at the age of eleven. Shakespeare’s loss of Hamnet, which
manifests his failure to become a biological father, yields his need to succeed as an artistic
creator. By explaining that “if others have their will Ann hath a way. By cock, she was to blame”
(Ulysses 9.256), Stephen deprives Shakespeare of his “will,” both in the sense of the context and
of his name. Dedalus gives “Ann hath(-)a(-)way” that control in a male reproductive sense
(“cock”) by deconstructing her name to allude to sexually having one’s “way” with another.

17
Shakespeare’s failure to successfully impregnate Ann with a son leaves him with only one
option, to “[im]pregnan[ate] [the] word” (Ulysses 14.259), thereby reclaiming sexual creation in
art.
Let us now turn to Stephen’s theory of Hamlet, through which Shakespeare rewrites his
story, replacing his biological failure with his artistic success. Dedalus begins with:
It is the ghost, the king, a king and no king, and the player is
Shakespeare who has studied Hamlet all the years of his life which
were not vanity in order to play the part of the spectre…To a son he
speaks, the son of his soul, the prince, young Hamlet and to the son
of his body, Hamnet Shakespeare, who has died in Stratford that his
namesake may live for ever. (Ulysses 9.164-173)
Stephen originates his theory on the fact that Shakespeare played Hamlet, the king. Thus,
Shakespeare is both father and “ghost” in his play. By playing the part of Hamlet’s father,
Shakespeare is able to “spea[k]” to the “son of his body, Hamnet Shakespeare” whose “d[eath]”
marks his own biological failure. Yet, Stephen claims that “through the ghost of the unquiet
father the image of the unliving son looks forth” (Ulysses 9.380-381). Thus, the “unliving son”
lives within the “ghost” of the “father.” The voice of the “unquiet father” (Ulysses 9.380) is “a
voice heard only in the heart of him who is the substance of his shadow, the son consubstantial
with the father” (Ulysses 9.481). Here, Stephen insists that the father’s “heart” is the “son” who
is the “substance of [the father’s] shadow” or in other words, the physical matter and presence of
that “shadow.” Furthermore, through “consubstantial[ity],” Shakespeare, as the ghost, is both
father and son—all sides of Hamlet—as he has “studied Hamlet [himself] all the years of his
life” (Ulysses 9.165-166). By becoming each part of the literary trinity (Father, Son, and Ghost),
Shakespeare the artist eclipses Shakespeare the man.
Through the Ghost of King Hamlet, Bloom, like Shakespeare, becomes each element of
the Shakespearean trinity. Throughout the text, Bloom maintains a ghostly presence. For

18
instance, Professor MacHugh, upon seeing Bloom in “Aeolus,” says, “the ghost walks” (Ulysses
7.237). However, it is the Ghost’s speech, and not his being, in which Bloom assumes the roles
of both father and son. Bloom plays the role of Shakespeare as father to Rudy “the son of his
body” (Ulysses 9.172), and Stephen, “the son of his soul” (Ulysses 9.171). He muses,
That is how poets write, the similar sounds. But then Shakespeare
has no rhymes: blank verse. The flow of the language it is. The
thoughts. Solemn.
Hamlet, I am thy father’s spirit
Doomed for a certain time to walk the earth. (Ulysses 8.64-68)
Although Bloom misquotes the ghost, “I am thy father’s spirit, / Doomed for a certain term to
walk the night” (Hamlet 1.5.9-10), by adding “Hamlet” at its onset and substituting both “term”
with “time,” and “night” with “earth,” his version of Shakespeare’s lines replaces the original in
the remaining text. In “Scylla and Charybdis,” which is the following episode, Stephen appears
to quote Bloom rather than Shakespeare by recalling that same misreading, “Hamlet, I am thy
father’s spirit” (Ulysses 9.170). By having Bloom first misquote the ghost’s most paternal words
to his son and then Stephen quote that corrupted line, Joyce associates them with Shakespeare as
father and son, respectively.
Ironically, just as Bloom becomes the father through the ghost’s corrupted words, it is
through them that he also assumes the role of son. King Hamlet, as the ghost of Paddy Dignam,
tells Bloom: “Bloom, I am Paddy Dignam’s spirit. List, list, O list! (Ulysses 15.1218). Just as
Bloom, and Stephen accordingly, add “Hamlet” (Ulysses 8.67, 9.170) at the beginning of the
quotation, Paddy Dignam inserts “Bloom.” Therefore, the name “Bloom” replaces that of
“Hamlet” (Ulysses 8.67, 9.170), which turns “Bloom” into the son.
Let us return to Stephen’s Hamlet theory. He expands his conception of Shakespeare as
the father: “he was not the father of his own son merely, but being no more a son, he was and felt

19
himself the father of all his race, the father of his own grandfather, the father of his unborn
grandson” (Ulysses 9.867-869). Just as Shakespeare’s father has died, so too has Bloom’s.
Furthermore, Bloom as the “limp father of thousands” (Ulysses 5.571), which echoes Abraham
as the first father of the first race, links him to Shakespeare who is “the father of all his race.” In
fact, in the previous episode, Bloom thinks of “the oldest, the first race” (Ulysses 4.223-224) in
the wake of the flood. Just as Shakespeare is “the father of all his race,” Bloom is the “father” of
“the oldest, the first race.” The words “all,” “oldest,” and “first,” emphasize the magnitude of
both Shakespeare and Bloom as “father” of their respective race.
However, the moment of artistic creation, when being “all in all” (Ulysses 9.1020-1021)
reaches fruition, is the result of both female and male power and not merely through the power of
the father. Stephen describes that creative moment:
—As we, or mother Dana, weave and unweave our bodies, Stephen
said, from day to day, their molecules shuttled to and fro, so does
the artist weave and unweave his image. And as the mole on my
right breast is where it was when I was born, though all my body has
been woven of new stuff time after time, so through the ghost of the
unquiet father the image of the unliving son looks forth. In the
intense instant of imagination, when the mind, Shelley says, is a
fading coal, that which I was is that which I am and that which in
possibility I may come to be. So in the future, the sister of the past,
I may see myself as I sit here now but by reflection from that which
then I shall be. (Ulysses 9.376-385)
Just as the “mother Dana weave[s] and unweave[s]…bodies,” so does the fatherly “artist” weave
and unweave…image[s].” Dana, the Celtic trifold goddess, is the mother of earth, fertility, and
plenty, the mother of the forces of youth, light, and knowledge, and the mother of the forces of
disintegration and death. Thus, she is a consubstantial trinity within herself. Therefore, to
achieve that “intense instant of imagination,” one must be a “glorified man, an androgynous
angel, being a wife unto himself” (Ulysses 9.1052).

20
Here is where the parallels between Bloom and Shakespeare diverge. As cuckolds, both
Shakespeare and Bloom lose their masculinity, the loss of which prevents them both from
successfully having male children. Stephen’s theory of Shakespeare emphasizes how he resolves
the loss of Hamnet in Hamlet by becoming a father in the purely artistic sense. However, by
claiming that a true artist must be a “glorified man, an androgynous angel, being a wife unto
himself” (Ulysses 9.1052), Stephen suggests that both male and female procreative powers are
needed to produce artistically. Bloom, unlike Shakespeare, inherently possesses the necessary
feminine qualities. By resolving the dichotomy between the phallus and vagina in the narrative,
Bloom is able to surpass Shakespeare as a self-sufficient artist. It is only after successfully
becoming an “androgynous angel” that the balance between the “glorified man” and the “wife”
in him can shift more towards the masculine. Thus, Bloom can fully become the ideal father after
being both father and mother in the moment of creation.
By embracing the feminine side of himself, Bloom becomes the “androgynous angel”
necessary for true artistic creation. During his unfulfilled affair with Martha Clifford, Bloom’s
pseudonym is Henry Flower. A flower is a metaphor for the vagina and female procreativity, and
accordingly, Bloom exists as a “manflower” (Ulysses 5.264), a being in between the two
genders. When taking a bath, Bloom, observing his genitals, says, “his navel, bud of flesh: and
saw the dark tangled curls of his bush floating, floating hair of the stream around the limp father
of thousands, a languid floating flower” (Ulysses 5.570-572). The image of the “limp…languid
floating flower” of Henry/Leopold Flower/Bloom suggests both impotency and epicene
transcendence. At first, his “limp phallus” reflects the dissolution of his male reproductive
faculty. However, Joyce reworks the image that deprived Bloom of his masculinity by describing
the phallus as a “floating flower.” Through the metaphor of his penis as a flower, traditionally

21
symbolic of the vagina and fertility, Joyce transmutes Bloom’s definite failure as a procreative
man into his potential success as a procreative hermaphrodite.
“Circe” further turns the symbolic reworking of his “limp” phallus into a dramatically
literal, yet prosaically figurative metamorphosis of his gender. Dr. Dixon calls Bloom, “a
finished example of the new womanly man” (Ulysses 15.1798-1799), one who “is about to have
a baby” (Ulysses 15.1810). Thus, in this moment, his “floating flower” (Ulysses 5.572) fulfills its
reproductive potential. Bloom’s exclamation, “O, I so want to be a mother” (Ulysses 15.1816),
echoes and inverts the image of him as a “limp father” (Ulysses 5.571). As the chapter
progresses, he becomes a woman to whom even the stage directions address with female
pronouns. However, Bella/Bello more accurately uses, “shis” (Ulysses 15.3103) and “hrim”
(Ulysses 15.3103), which reflect his androgyny.
It is only after Bloom throws off his female costume, that his androgynous imbalance
shifts from the predominately female to the predominately male: “[f]rom infancy to maturity he
had resembled his maternal procreatrix. From maturity to senility he would increasingly
resemble his paternal procreator” (Ulysses 17.1355-1356). By recapturing his masculinity,
Bloom does what Shakespeare cannot: reclaim the part of his identity which had been destroyed
as a cuckold. However, the word “increasingly” serves as a reminder that Bloom does not
become a completely “[man]ly man” (Ulysses 15.1799). Rather, Bloom emerges as the “glorified
man [paternal procreator],…androgynous angel, being a wife [maternal procreatrix] unto
himself” (Ulysses 9.1052).
As the “androgynous angel,” Bloom gives birth to himself as “all in all” (Ulysses 9.10201021). During the moment of his emasculation on Ben Howth, Bloom becomes metaphorically
impregnated with Molly’s seed. He recollects, “ravished over her I lay, full lips full open, kissed

22
her mouth. Yum. Softly she gave me in my mouth the seedcake warm and chewed…Joy: I ate it:
joy” (Ulysses 8.907-909). In feeding Bloom a “seedcake,” Molly impregnates him with her
“see[d].” That “see[d]” reappears at the end of “Ithaca” when Bloom lies in the fetal position:
Listener: reclined semilaterally, left, left hand under head, right leg
extended in a straight line and resting on left leg, flexed, in the
attitude of Gea-Tellus, fulfilled, recumbent, big with seed. Narrator:
reclined laterally, left, with right and left legs flexed, the index
finger and thumb of the right hand resting on the bridge of the nose,
in the attitude depicted in a snapshot photograph made by Percy
Apjohn, the childman weary, the manchild in the womb. (Ulysses
17.2312-2318)
The pregnant Bloom, “big with seed,” rebirths himself as the “son consubstantial with the father”
(Ulysses 9.481). Thus, he is both “manchild,” son, and “childman,” father.
In fact, through his rebirth, Bloom regrows a beard that enables him to truly usurp
Shakespeare. Several studies point out the association of the beard with masculinity and more
specifically, the male generative faculty. One scholar, Will Fisher, actually turns to Shakespeare
to support that notion. In Troilus and Cressida, he emphasizes the pun on hairs and heirs.
Speaking to Cressida, Pandarus describes an interaction between Helen and Troilus in which
Helen notices a white hair on his chin. She tells him, “Here’s but two-and-fifty-hairs on your
chin, and one of them is white” (Troilus and Cressida 1.2.162-163); to which Troilus, after
repeating the numbers, responds, “That white hair is my father, and all the rest are his sons”
(Troilus and Cressida 1.2.167-168). By assimilating his own production of facial hairs to his
father’s production of heirs—notably, his fifty sons—Troilus emphasizes his own procreative
potential. Thus, Shakespeare himself, directly links the ability to grow facial hair and a man’s
fertility.13

13

Fisher 174-175.

23
Through the image of the beardless Shakespeare who appears in “Circe,” Bloom, and
Joyce, replace the Bard as the epitome of the artistic creator. When, at last, Bloom and Stephen
meet, together they gaze into a mirror and see, “the face of William Shakespeare,
beardless…rigid in facial paralysis, crowned by the reflection of the reindeer antlered hatrack in
the hall” (Ulysses 15.3821-3824). To be “beardless” is to be in both artistic and biological
“paralysis.” The antlers, symbolizing the horns of a cuckold, tie the loss of male generative
potential with Anne’s actions. Unlike Bloom who possesses female reproductive potential,
Shakespeare can only be the father, in Bloom, and the son, in Stephen, individually, but is not
both simultaneously. After Bloom becomes “childman” and “manchild,” he regrows his beard
and accordingly, eclipses Shakespeare. Bloom’s wanted poster describes him as “may have since
grown a beard, when last seen was wearing a black suit” (Ulysses 17.2003-2004). Last seen,
Bloom resembles Hamlet dressed in “black,” but now in the narrative, he “may have since grown
a beard.” In “Penelope,” Bloom becomes “more like a man with his beard a bit grown” (Ulysses
18.30).
Bloom’s metamorphosis, recreating and fulfilling the Shakespearean trinity and
becoming a self-sufficient procreative force, is merely a Mouse-Trap within Joyce’s Ulysses. In
writing Ulysses, Joyce reemerges as “all in all” (9.1020-1021). He is consubstantially both son
and father in the guise of Stephen, as son, and Bloom, as father. While Shakespeare can only be
the son, “the boy of act one,” and then the “mature man of act five” (Ulysses 9.1020), that
“which [Joyce] was is that which [he] [is] and that which in possibility [he] may come to be”
(Ulysses 9.384-385).

24

II
SHADES OF HAZEL
Child as Ghost and Creator in Pale Fire

Unlike Joyce who rewrites Shakespeare, the man, into a figure that he can evolve and
supersede in Ulysses, Nabokov, in Pale Fire, rewrites Hamlet, the work, as the means by which
he can artistically transcend Shakespeare’s influence. Both writers creatively “misread” the
significance of Shakespeare in the part of the ghost. Joyce uses it as vehicle to reinvent
Shakespeare biographically; Nabokov views it as a metaphor for the Bard’s creative presence
throughout, and ownership of, each work.
At first, the presence of Shakespeare in Pale Fire seems to contest Nabokov’s authorial
voice. The form of the text, four cantos and one commentary, reflects the five-act structure of a
Shakespearean drama. However, the Bard also infiltrates the words within that structure. In “The
Nature of Electricity,” a poem by John Shade included in the commentary, the speaker says,
“And maybe Shakespeare floods a whole / Town with innumerable lights” (Nabokov, Pale Fire
192). In this image, the Bard’s ghost consumes the town in light; in fact, Shakespeare “floods”
the world of Pale Fire. He haunts the trees of Shakespeare Avenue, and even the poet’s words,
“Help me Will! Pale Fire” (Pale Fire 68), in search of a title. We see him in the landscape, we
hear him in the poetic mind, and we feel him behind the the title.
Pale Fire stems from one of two Shakespeare plays, Timon of Athens or Hamlet, or both.
In Timon of Athens, the phrase “pale fire” appears in the lines:
The sun’s a thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast sea. The moon’s an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun.
The sea’s a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The moon into salt tears. (4.3.437–441)

25
The “pale fire” in the passage is a borrowed, or “snatche[d],” object, which appropriately reflects
the idea of a stolen title. However, in his note to line 962, “Help me Will! Pale Fire,” Kinbote
writes:
Paraphrased, this evidently means: Let me look in Shakespeare for
something I might use for a title. And the find is “pale fire.” But in
which of the Bard’s works did our poet cull it? My readers must
make their own research. All I have with me is a tiny vest pocket
edition of Timon of Athens—in Zemblan! It certainly contains
nothing that could be regarded as an equivalent of “pale fire” (if it
had, my luck would have been a statistical monster). (Nabokov, Pale
Fire 285)
While he “paraphrase[s]” the line with certainty as evidence that Shade picks his title from a
work of Shakespeare, he implores that “[his] readers must make their own research.” Kinbote
only has access to a translated version of Timon of Athens which “certainly” does not contain the
reference. His note is significant for two reasons. On the one hand, he is suggesting that the line
does not come from that play. On the other, he implores the readers of his commentary to look; if
they do explore the commentary, they will find that Kinbote includes the retranslation of a
Zemblan translation of the very lines that include “pale fire:”
The sun is a thief; she lures the sea
and robs it. The moon is a thief:
he steals his silvery light from the sun
The sea is a thief: it dissolves the moon. (Pale Fire 80)
Evidently, the “silvery light” replaces the original “pale fire.” However, the translation inverts
many aspects of the original, including the genders of the sun and the moon.
If the reader instead turns to Shakespeare’s canon, they will also find the term in Hamlet.
Upon leaving his son, the Ghost cries:
Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me. (1.5.88-91)

26
As Nabokov believes that Hamlet is “probably the greatest miracle in all literature,”14 it is no
coincidence that the title echoes the Ghost’s words. In fact, one of the scenes that Nabokov
would like to have filmed is “Shakespeare in the part of the King’s Ghost” (Nabokov, Strong
Opinions 60). In his Forward to Lolita: A Screenplay, Nabokov explains:
By nature I am no dramatist; I am not even a hack scenarist; but if I
had given as much of myself to the stage or the screen as I have to
the kind of writing which serves a triumphant life sentence between
the covers of a book, I would have advocated and applied a system
of total tyranny, directing the play or the picture myself, choosing
settings and costumes, terrorizing the actors, mingling with them in
the bit part of guest, or ghost, prompting them, and, in a word,
pervading the entire show with the will and art of one individual.
(ix-x)
In Nabokov’s mind, to be the “ghost” is to “pervad[e] [an entire work] with the will and art of
one individual. Titling a work is the ultimate act of ownership; yet in Nabokov’s novel, Shade’s
naming of his poem “Pale Fire” gets usurped by Kinbote who entitles the collective work, both
poem and his commentary, Pale Fire. Thus, whichever play from which “pale fire” stems,
conceding the role of naming the text to the Bard brings the question of authorship to the
forefront.
In fact, Kinbote’s advice on how to read the work, which engenders three possible paths
that a reader might take, complicates that very question. He instructs his readers:
Although those notes, in conformity with custom, come after the
poem, the reader is advised to consult them first and then study the
poem with their help, rereading them of course as he goes through
its text, and perhaps, after having done with the poem, consulting
them a third time so as to complete the picture.
(Nabokov, Pale Fire 28)

14

Boyd, American Years 100.

27
The reader might follow those instructions or at least begin with the commentary, read the poem
alongside the commentary, or begin with the poem before turning to the commentary. Each
approach produces a unique effect on the reader: viewing Kinbote as the superior writer, the
commentator as crazy, or the poet as the better of the two, respectively.15 No matter which path
the reader takes, he will feel the discordance between the poem and the commentary.
While the dissonance between “Pale Fire” and the annotations seemingly emphasize the
existence of two distinct writers, many readers search and find clues attributing the entirety of
Pale Fire to Kinbote or Shade, most likely dependent on the order in which they tackle the
novel. In fact, both characters bear similarities to their maker: Vladimir Nabokov. Near the
conclusion of his commentary, Kinbote says: “I may assume other disguises, other forms, but I
shall try to exist. I may turn up yet, on another campus, as an old, happy, healthy, heterosexual
Russian, a writer in exile” (Pale Fire 300-301). That description fits Nabokov to a tee. However,
Shade’s resemblance to the Russian professor of literature at Cornell overshadows Kinbote’s
remark.
The poet resembles both Nabokov the writer, and Nabokov the man. Kinbote receives
“Pale Fire” as a “batch of eighty cards…held by a rubber band” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 15). In
Nabokov’s Playboy interview, he describes his writing process:
I do not begin my novel at the beginning…This is why I like writing
my stories and novels on index cards, numbering them later when
the whole set is complete. Every card is rewritten many times. About
three cards make one typewritten page, and when finally I feel that
the conceived picture has been copied by me as faithfully as
physically possible—a few vacant lots always remain, alas—then I
dictate the novel to my wife who types it out in triplicate.
(Strong Opinions 32)

15

Grabes 55-56.

28
In the same interview, he says: “[t]his box contains index cards with some notes I made at
various times more or less recently and discarded when writing Pale Fire. It’s a little batch of
rejects” (Strong Opinions 29-30). This quotation ties its speaker to John Shade twicefold. First,
Shade also keeps “lovely rejections in his files” (Pale Fire 15-16). Second, his wife “urged him
to put off its disposal till the time when the marble finality of an immaculate typescript would
have confirmed it” (Pale Fire 16). Just as Nabokov claims he almost burned Lolita in the
“garden incinerator” (Strong Opinions 105), Shade in fact “burn[s] a whole stack of them in the
pale fire of the incinerator” (Pale Fire 15). In fact, it was Vera who saved Lolita by “urging
delay” (Strong Opinions 105). Biographically, the “Shades’ sedan” (Pale Fire 20) reflects the
Nabokov’s “eight-year-old Plymouth four-door sedan” (Boyd, American Years 130). Both
professors would “have his [respective] wife call for him after classes with the car” (Pale Fire
22).
In fact, Shade himself alludes to another source who controls his writing.
One of the many scholars to whom Shade appears as an insufficient choice, Brian Boyd,
nominates Hazel Shade as the creator of the work. In the final Canto, Shade says: “For there are
those mysterious moments when / Too weary to delete, I drop my pen; / I ambulate—and by
some mute command / The right word flutes and perches on my hand” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 65).
Kinbote says, “superb singing verses (given by me in note to lines 70, 79, and 130, all in Canto
One, which he obviously worked at with a greater degree of creative freedom than he enjoyed
afterwards)” (Pale Fire 81-82). John Shade does not address his dead daughter in Canto One, the
canto in which his “creative freedom” is at its highest. The key word “creative” implies that
there is another creative force in the cantos that follow.

29
Kinbote describes a moment in which he sees that “creative” force at work: “at night, in
the violet glow of his upstairs study where a kindly mirror reflected for me his hunched-up
shoulders and the pencil with which he kept picking his ear (inspecting now and then the lead,
and even tasting it)” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 89). It is almost as if the poet listens to the pencil as it
whispers in his ear. Kinbote continues: “I could distinguish the expression of passionate interest,
rapture and reverence, with which he followed the images wording themselves in his mind, and I
knew that whatever my agnostic friend might say in denial, at that moment Our Lord was with
him” (Pale Fire 89). The idea of “images wording themselves,” moves from sight—or rather
insight—to language. While, Kinbote attributes the ghostly power to “Our Lord,” perhaps the
“Lord” of this text is of a different kind altogether.
Who is that force? As Kinbote says, “[m]y friend could not evoke the image of his
father” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 101). Thus, unlike in Hamlet, the ghostly force cannot be the ghost
of Shade’s father. There is one character, however, with whom the ghostly plane is associated:
Hazel Shade, the deceased daughter of the poet, whose death, like that of Hamlet, the father,
seems to be precisely what the poet, as does Hamlet, the son in Hamlet, grapples with in “Pale
Fire.” In contrast to the non-image of Shade’s father, he is able to “evoke the image of his
[daughter]” in the poem. Kinbote notes, “[t]rue, in this canto he has unburdened himself pretty
thoroughly, and his picture of Hazel is quite clear and complete; maybe a little too complete,
architectonically, since the reader cannot help feeling that it has been expanded and elaborated to
the detriment of certain other richer and rarer matters ousted by it” (Pale Fire 164). The image of
Hazel, according to our commentator, is “a little too complete” and her picture therefore
overpowers other imagery in the poem, whether or not we agree with Kinbote that the other

30
“matters” are superior. Ultimately, we feel the presence of Hazel’s metaphorical ghost
throughout the entire work.
In fact, through Kinbote’s stories, we learn that even when living, Hazel communes with
ghosts. Kinbote concludes his note, about the poltergeist’s presence shortly after the death of
Aunt Maud:
but how curious it is that we do not perceive a mysterious sign of
equation between the Hercules springing forth from a neurotic
child’s weak frame and the boisterous ghost of Aunt Maud; how
curious that our rationality feels satisfied when we plump for the
first explanation, though, actually, the scientific and the
supernatural, the miracle of the muscle and the miracle of the mind,
are both inexplicable as are all the ways of Our Lord.
(Nabokov, Pale Fire 167)
Here again, he attributes the power to “Our Lord” despite linking Hazel’s “weak frame” and her
aunt’s “boisterous ghost” in the same elongated sentence. In fact, earlier in this note, Kinbote
says, “although never able to corner her, that flabby, feeble, clumsy and solemn girl, who seemed
more interested than frightened, he and Sybil never doubted that in some extraordinary way she
was the agent of the disturbance” (Pale Fire 166). The negation, “never doubted,” emphasizes
the certainty with which Hazel was the “agent” of this particular ghostly instance. The
description of Hazel, who in the face of otherworldly interactions, “seemed more interested than
frightened,” transitions into the pinnacle haunted “barn incident” (Pale Fire 164), which Kinbote
cites at the beginning of this particular note.
In the scene at the barn, the ghost forges a direct link between Hazel and Shakespeare.
One of Hazel’s notes describes “a roundlet of pale light” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 188). Kinbote
explains:
the notes continue for several pages but for obvious reasons I must
renounce to give them verbatim in this commentary. There were
long pauses and “scratches and scrapings” again, and returns of the

31
luminous circlet. She spoke to it. If asked something that it found
deliciously silly (“Are you a will-o-the-wisp?”) it would dash to and
fro in ecstatic negation, and when it wanted to give a grave answer
to a grave question (“Are you dead?”) would slowly ascend with an
air of gathering altitude for a weighty affirmative drop.
(Pale Fire 188)
The ghostly “will-o-the-wisp” is the “roundlet of pale light,” or rather, pale fire, that Hazel sees
in the haunted barn. However, it also suggests Shakespeare who is the hidden “will” throughout
his canon. In his poem “Shakespeare,” Nabokov writes “It’s true, of course, a usurer had grown /
accustomed, for a sum, to sign your work / (that Shakespeare—Will—who played the Ghost in
Hamlet” (18-20). Like Shakespeare, Nabokov himself practices the act of “affirm[ing] [one’s]
authorship in code” (Nabokov, Selected Letters 391).
The haunted barn becomes a play itself. Kinbote continues,
There are always “three nights” in fairy tales, and in this sad fairy
tale there was a third one too. This time she wanted her parents to
witness the “talking light” with her. The minutes of that third session
in the barn have not been preserved but I offer the reader the
following scene which I feel cannot be too far removed from the
truth:
THE HAUNTED BARN
Pitch-darkness. Father, Mother and Daughter are heard breathing gently
in different corners. Three minutes pass.
FATHER (to Mother)
Are you comfortable there?
MOTHER
Uh-huh. These potato sacks make a perfect—
DAUGHTER (with steam-engine force)
Sh-sh-sh!
Fifteen minutes pass in silence. The eye begins to make out here and there
in the darkness bluish slits of night and one star.
MOTHER
That was Dad’s tummy, I think—not a spook.
DAUGHTER (mouthing it)
Very funny!

32
Another fifteen minutes elapse. Father, deep in workshop thoughts, heaves
a neutral sigh.
DAUGHTER
Must we sigh all the time?
Fifteen minutes elapse.
MOTHER
If I start snoring let Spook pinch me.
DAUGHTER (overemphasizing self-control)
Mother! Please! Please, Mother!
Father clears his throat but decides not to say anything.
Twelve more minutes elapse.
MOTHER
Does anyone realize that there are still quite a few of those creampuffs in
the refrigerator?
That does it.
DAUGHTER (exploding)
Why must you spoil everything? Why must you always spoil everything?
Why can’t you leave people alone? Don’t touch me!
FATHER
Now look, Hazel, Mother won’t say another word, and we’ll go on with
this—but we’ve been sitting an hour here and it’s getting late.
Two minutes pass. Life is hopeless, afterlife heartless. Hazel is heard
quietly weeping in the dark. John Shade lights a lantern. Sybil lights a
cigarette. Meeting adjourned

The light never came back but gleams again in a short poem [of John
Shade’s] “The Nature of Electricity.” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 190-192)
In the title and the stage directions, the italics in the miniature play represent authorial control. In
Lolita, Humbert himself says, “I now warn the reader not to mock me and my mental daze. It is
easy for him and me to decipher now a past destiny; but a destiny in the making is, believe me,
not one of those honest mystery stories where all you have to do is keep an eye on the clues. In
my youth I once read a French detective tale where the clues were actually in italics” (210-211).
Here, in Pale Fire, the “clues [are] actually in italics.” However, the italics become a kind of
commentary in “that does it.” Who says that? The words trigger a power shift from Hazel in her
words spoil, always, and alone. The Shakespearean light remains invisible to her parents and that

33
“will-o-the-wisp” “never c[omes] back.” However, the poem that follows includes the lines:
“And maybe Shakespeare floods a whole / Town with innumerable lights” (Pale Fire 192).
Kinbote’s description of Wordsmith College provides a “correlated pattern” for
understanding Hazel’s role in Pale Fire. Kinbote says, “the prisonlike edifice containing our
classrooms and offices (to be called from now on Shade Hall), the famous avenue of all the trees
mentioned by Shakespeare, a distant droning sound, the hint of a haze, the turquoise dome of the
Observatory, wisps and pale plumes of cirrus” (Pale Fire 92-93). Shakespeare Avenue gains its
name specifically from its trees. The key words are “Shakespeare,” “trees,” “haze”—as a
diminutive of Hazel and in its traditional sense—“turquoise”—as a shade of blue—“wisps,” and
of course, “pale.” The close proximity of diction and imagery that appears throughout the text,
frequently together, suggests that their meaning is shared collectively.
When “blue” and “haze” reappear together, they link Hazel to theater. In Canto III, the
speaker says,
Time means succession, and succession, change:
Hence timelessness is bound to disarrange
Schedules of sentiment…
…Time means growth,
And growth means nothing in Elysian life.
Fondling a changeless child,
The flax-haired wife
Grieves on the brink of a remembered pond
Full of a dreamy sky. And also, blond,
But with a touch of tawny in the shade,
Feet up, knees clasped, on a stone balustrade
The other sits and raises a moist gaze
Toward the blue impenetrable haze.
…Know of the head-on crash which on a wild
March night killed both the mother and the child?
(Nabokov, Pale Fire 54)
The lines before “blue impenetrable haze” consistently underscore their connection to Hazel
Shade. The image of someone “griev[ing] on the brink of a remembered pond” alludes to the loss

34
of Hazel in a body of water. The passage also mentions the last name “shade.” However, “time”
and “child” link the passage to a specific Shade. In Canto II, John Shade reflects “…while
children of her age / Were cast as elves and fairies on the stage / That she’d helped paint for the
school pantomime, / My gentle girl appeared as Mother Time” (Pale Fire 44). Thus, “child”
recalls “children” and “time” recalls “Mother Time,” who of course, is Hazel. Here, the words
“blue” and “haze” reappear and in doing so, explicate that Hazel, as “Mother Time,” embodies
“succession, “growth,” and “change.” In fact, the context of the poem further links this time as
succession passage to the key words and Hazel. The speaker says, “Who rides so late in the night
and the wind? / It is the writer’s grief. It is the wild / March wind. It is the father with his child”
(Pale Fire 57). Here, “night,” “grief,” “wild,” “March,” and “child” appear once more. However,
this time, the words underscore the connection between Shade, as both writer and father, and
Hazel.
This pattern persists in his poetry which discusses both death and Shakespeare with the
combination of blue and shade. In a poem dedicated to his father’s death, Nabokov says,
I see a radiant cloud, I see a rooftop glisten
like a mirror, far away … I listen
to breathing shade, light’s stillicide …
You’re absent—why? You’re dead, and on a day
the humid world is bluish. (Nabokov, “Easter” 1-5)
Nabokov’s neologism “stillicide” also appears in Pale Fire. When tying the words to
Shakespeare, he specifically turns to Hamlet: “My dream was a blue-colored roadway / that
through a shady hamlet passed” (Nabokov, “Dream” 7-8); “(the students were performing
Hamlet / and heaven was out of joint for / the bard’s illustrious shade)” (Nabokov, “The
University Poem” stanza 19). It is important to note that “shade” suggests ghost or spectre.
However, like the word “haze,” it also resonates with the idea of obscurity. Ultimately, Hazel

35
Shade’s entire name evokes the idea of a “shady a hamlet.” Right before her death, she “peer[s] /
at ghostly trees” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 49). The return of the italics alongside the phrase “ghostly
trees” reaffirm Hazel’s full transformation into a “will-o-the-wisp” in death as well as her
creative control.
Hazel Shade’s ghostly artistic control inverts Hamlet. In Shakespeare’s play, the son
grapples with his father’s death; in Pale Fire it is the father that copes with the death of his child.
When interpreting each work autobiographically, however, fiction inverts reality. Shakespeare
rewrites the death of his son, Hamnet, as the death of the father; it should also be noted that his
father, John Shakespeare, died the year of Hamlet’s completion. Nabokov rewrites the death of
his own father into the death of the child.
Although the fictional John Shade resembles the author, paradoxically, he also reflects
three other distinct yet very real men: Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov (his father), John
Shakespeare (Shakespeare’s father) and Hamnet Shakespeare (Shakespeare’s son). While the
death of John Shade ties the poet to Nabokov’s father, his first experience with death ties him to
Hamnet Shakespeare. Not only does Shade dies on his father’s birthday, July 21st, but the death
scene echoes the death of the latter. When describing the moment, Kinbote writes, “Oh, he was
aiming at me all right but missing me every time, the incorrigible bungler…One of the bullets
that spared me struck [Shade] in the side and went through his heart” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 294).
Just as Shade dies from a bullet to the heart by assassin with poor aim, so too does Nabokov’s
father die from a bullet to the heart meant for someone else.16 On March 28th, 1922, a monarchist
assassin, during a botched attempt on the life of Paul Milyukov, his colleague and politician,

16

Boyd, Pale Fire 78-79.

36
inadvertently shot and killed his father.17 Furthermore, Shade ends his first canto by recounting a
near death experience when he was “eleven” (Pale Fire 38), the same age that Hamnet
Shakespeare was when he died. In some sense, John Shade is the Hamnet that lived.
Pale Fire ultimately reflects and refracts Hamlet just as both Shakespeare and Nabokov
rewrite reality into fiction through inversion. Nabokov writes Pale Fire ultimately in Zemblan,
which is “the tongue of the mirror” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 242). and uses a backwards alphabet
reflected in the name “Zembla” itself. Shade explains that Hazel “twisted words: pot, top, /
Spider, redips. And ‘powder’ was ‘red wop’” (Pale Fire 45). Through Hazel, Nabokov translates
Shakespeare and Hamlet into his own mirrored language.

17

Nabokov, Selected Poems 168.

37

INTERLUDE
D OLORES H AZEL S HADE :
Two Works by Hazel Brown
It was a year of Tempests: Hurricane
Lolita swept from Florida to Maine.
JOHN SHADE

39

INTERLUDE

D OLORES H AZEL S HADE :
Two Works by Hazel Brown
On the 5th of July, John Shade was born, Charles Kinbote was born, and Humbert
Humbert learns that Lolita has left the hospital, and him forever. However, it is through William
Shakespeare that these two works—Pale Fire and Lolita—become intertwined. The emphasis on
Shakespeare as a ghost becomes literal in Lolita. In Pale Fire, the image of “Shakespeare
flood[ing] a whole / Town with innumerable lights” (Nabokov 192) evokes a town being haunted
by the “will-o-the-wisp” (Nabokov 188)—Shakespeare as a ghost. In Lolita, Humbert says,
“Shakespeare, a ghost town in New Mexico, where bad man Russian Bill was colorfully hanged
seventy years ago” (Nabokov 157). Shakespeare, New Mexico is not Humbert’s invention;
however, since Shakespeare is no longer listed in any atlas, it is now a “ghost town.”18 Moreover,
John Shade writes, “It was a year of Tempests: Hurricane / Lolita swept from Florida to Maine”
(Nabokov, Pale Fire 58). The Tempest is of course a Shakespearean play, and one that shares
similarities to Lolita. Humbert states that “the stipulation of the Roman law, according to which
a girl may marry at twelve, was adopted by the Church, and is still preserved, rather tacitly, in
some of the United States” (Nabokov, Lolita 135); two of those ten states are Florida and
Maine.19 To return to Pale Fire, Kinbote’s comment is:

18

Appel 390.

19

Appel 383.

40
Line 680: Lolita
Major hurricanes are given feminine names in America. The
feminine gender is suggested not so much by the sex of furies and
harridans as by a general professional application. Thus any
machine is a she to its fond user, and any fire (even a “pale” one!)
is she to the fireman, as water is she to the passionate plumber. Why
our poet chose to give his 1958 hurricane a little-used Spanish name
(sometimes given to parrots) instead of Linda or Lois, is not clear.
(Nabokov, 243)
He underscores the Shakespearean connection by referring to a pale fire, however, he explains
that “any fire (even a “pale” one!) is feminine.
In fact, the feminine motif amalgamates Nabokov, Shakespeare, Hazel Shade, and
Dolores Haze. In addressing the calendric error in his birthday and choosing not to correct it,
Nabokov simultaneously links himself to Shakespeare and the name Hazel.
All dates are given in the New Style: we lagged twelve days behind
the rest of the civilized world in the nineteenth century, and thirteen
in the beginning of the twentieth. By the Old Style I was born on
April 10, at daybreak, in the last year of the last century, and that
was (if I could have been whisked across the border at once) April
22 in, say, Germany; but since all my birthdays were celebrated,
with diminishing pomp, in the twentieth century, everybody,
including myself, upon being shifted by revolution and expatriation
from the Julian calendar to the Gregorian, used to add thirteen,
instead of twelve days to the 10th of April. The error is serious. What
is to be done? I find “April 23” under “birth date” in my most
recent20 passport, which is also the birth date of Shakespeare, my
nephew Vladimir Sikorski, Shirley Temple and Hazel Brown (who,
moreover, shares my passport). This, then, is the problem.
Calculatory ineptitude prevents me from trying to solve it.
(Nabokov, Speak, Memory 13-14)
Here, Nabokov expounds the calendric complications in assigning his birth to a date. According
to the “Old Style” Julian Calendar, he was born on April 10th, 1899, which corresponds to April
22nd, 1899, in the “New Style” Gregorian Calendar. However, in the 20th century shift from

20

Italics, mine.

41
Julian to Gregorian, a universal error mistakenly correlated April 10th to April 23rd, instead of
April 22nd. Due to this “serious error,” the date of birth listed on his passport is the same as
several others, beginning with “William Shakespeare” and concluding with “Hazel Brown (who,
moreover, shares [his] passport).” Hazel Brown is, of course, Vladimir Nabokov himself (and his
eye color which would also be listed in his passport). Although he exaggerates the grievousness
of this error in date, he slips in that it occurs in his “most recent” passport, one that he could have
in fact corrected. Certainly, Nabokov, the chess genius and mathematically precise writer, does
not suffer from “calculatory ineptitude.” Rather, he chooses not to “solve it” because it is central
to his artistic identity and creations.
“Hazel” resurfaces in both Lolita and Pale Fire. In the former, Humbert Humbert
continuously abbreviates the nickname, Lolita, of Dolores Haze to “L.” Strung together, Dolores
is “Haze, L”, which yields “Hazel.”21 The name “Smith, Hazel” (Nabokov, Lolita 52) itself also
emerges in his diary as one of the students on Lolita’s class list. Hazel Smith appears once more
in the novel: “Donald Scott…had done it with Hazel Smith in his uncle’s garage” (Lolita 136).
Lolita also directly hearkens back to “Hazel Brown:” “Handsome Bryan Bryanski, alias Anthony
Bryan, alias Tony Brown, eyes hazel, complexion fair, was wanted for kidnaping” (Lolita 222).
Combining the man’s “alias” with the description of his eye color, we get “Brown,…hazel”
which inverses Nabokov’s pseudonym exactly.
Shakespeare is both poet and playwright. However, Nabokov believes that “the verbal
poetical texture of Shakespeare is the greatest the world has known, and is immensely superior to

21

Shapiro 330.

42
the structure of his plays as plays. With Shakespeare it is the metaphor that is the thing, not the
play”22 (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 89-90). In Lolita, Humbert echoes his maker’s views:
I detest the theatre as being a primitive and putrid form, historically
speaking, a form that smacks of stone-age rites and communal
nonsense despite those individual injections of genius, such as, say,
Elizabethan poetry which a closeted reader automatically pumps out
of the stuff. Being much occupied at the time with my own literary
labors, I did not bother to read the complete text of The Enchanted
Hunters, the playlet in which Dolores Haze was assigned the part of
a farmer’s daughter who imagines herself to be a woodland witch,
or Diana, or something, and who, having got hold of a book on
hypnotism, plunges a number of lost hunters into various
entertaining trances before falling in her turn under the spell of a
vagabond poet (Mona Dahl). (Nabokov 200).
By turning to Elizabethan poetry to introduce Quilty’s play, a faux-Elizabethan drama, Humbert
puts theater and poetry—Quilty as the Shakespearean playwright and Humbert as the
Shakespearean poet—in competition. Humbert concludes his memoir with: “I am thinking of
aurochs and angels, the secret of durable pigments, prophetic sonnets, the refuge of art. And this
is the only immortality you and I may share, my Lolita” (Lolita 309). Shakespeare shares the
notion that the power of art, particularly poetry, can transcend the limitations of life. Humbert’s
conclusion echoes that of Shakespeare’s “Sonnet 18:”
But they eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st,
Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade
When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st;
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee. (Shakespeare 9-14)

22

Buck Mulligan says, “[t]he play’s the thing” (Ulysses 9.876-877). Here, Joyce echoes Hamlet’s line, “[t]he play’s

the thing” (Hamlet 2.2.633). Nabokov, on the other hand, amends Shakespeare’s words by replacing “pla[y]” with
“metaphor.”

43
In fact, at Pavor Manor, Quilty exclaims, “I propose to borrow—you know, as the Bard said with
that cold in his head, to borrow and to borrow and to borrow” (Lolita 301). As only the dramatist
and not the poet, Quilty is doomed to be “the Bard…with [a] cold.” He can only “borrow”
whereas Humbert can create.
Both Kinbote and Humbert allude to moments in Shakespeare’s plays to describe their art
outside the realm of theater. Kinbote says, “I may turn up yet, on another campus, as an old,
happy, healthy, heterosexual Russian, a writer in exile, sans fame, sans future, sans audience,
sans anything but his art” (Nabokov, Pale Fire 300-301). Here, Nabokov alludes to the end of
the “All the world’s a stage” speech:
All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages…
………………………………………………
…Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
(As You Like It 2.7.138-165)
Through “sans audience,” Kinbote expunges the motif that “all the world’s a stage.” Rather than
“sans everything,” Kinbote concludes with “sans anything but his art.” Quilty’s play, on the
other hand, consists of seven hunters, a number which reflects the “many parts” that a man plays
during “his acts being seven ages.” As “a writer in exile,” Humbert is able to turn Lolita into art.
Indeed, in The Tempest, Prospero perfects his “art” during his exile.23 Humbert’s words, “thick

23

Schuman 71.

44
tears that poets and lovers shed” (Nabokov, Lolita 52), allude to A Midsummer’s Night Dream.
In the opening scene of Act V, Theseus says,
The lunatic, the lover and the poet
Are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold,
That is, the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.
The poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
(A Midsummer’s Night Dream 5.1.7-17)
Humbert brings the amalgamation of “the lunatic, the lover and the poet” to life. He chooses to
echo lines from Shakespeare’s play that discuss poetry over theater. Like Nabokov, Humbert
picks “the poet’s pen” over the idea that “all the world’s a stage.”

45

PART II
M ETAPHYSICAL C HECKMATE :
Scenes on Killer Street and Grimm Road
Poète en deux langues, en prose et en vers,
toujours poète24
JORGE GUILLÉN

24

Guillén inscription to Nabokov on Cantico, January 15, 1945: “poet in two languages, in prose and in
verse, always a poet;” Cited in Boyd, American Years 88.

47

PART II

M ETAPHYSICAL C HECKMATE :
Scenes on Killer Street and Grimm Road

Humbert Humbert says, “A poet à mes heures, I composed a madrigal to the soot-black
lashes of her pale-gray vacant eyes, to the five asymmetrical freckles of her bobbed nose, to the
blond down of her brown limbs; but I tore it up and cannot recall it today” (Nabokov, Lolita 44).
In this attempt to artistically capture the nymphic nature of Lolita, Humbert can only render her
in fragments, in fact, only fragments of fragments. He cannot fixate on her “eyes,” “nose,” or
“limbs” themselves but only their “lashes,” its “freckles,” and their hairs, respectively. The
detailed attributes belong to Lolita’s body parts rather than to her being.
This seemingly insignificant instance of Humbert’s literary failure is in fact a lens
through which we can read both his reunion with the long lost Lolita Haze, now Schiller, and his
murder of Clare Quilty at the end of the book. In his visit with Dolly Schiller, Humbert
recaptures the elements of Lolita in his destroyed madrigal, but at last those features are hers
rather than her features’ features. During the murder of Quilty, he transposes the very reasons
that his madrigal failed onto his rival.
From his jail cell, Humbert Humbert writes these scenes almost as if they were one. The
significance of blurring the distinction between his visits to 10 Killer Street and Pavor Manor lies
in the fact that it is through these scenes that Humbert becomes a poet who, at last, is capable of
creating art. The following chapter will individually explore the scenes in the context of the

48
novel—and consider what reading them in conjunction might mean for Humbert’s (and
Nabokov’s) conception of the art in Lolita.

I
A Grimm Kill

Let us begin by asking: what is it about these two scenes that suggests that they should be
investigated as more entwined than other couplings in the novel? Rather than their close
proximity, it is the way in which the visits to 10 Killer Street and Pavor Manor echo each other
and transcend spatial boundaries. Both scenes begin with the idea that there is no one, no Lolita,
no Quilty, there. Right before Dolly Schiller’s words of hello, Humbert writes “Personne. Je
resonne. Repersonne. From what depth this re-nonsense” (Nabokov, Lolita 269). The French
translates to “Nobody. I re-rang the bell. Re-nobody.”25 On Quilty’s doorstep, Humbert “trie[s]
the knocker. Re-nobody” (Lolita 294). This “re-nobody,” now translated from the French by
Humbert, is truly the second nobody. The murder of Quilty fulfills Humbert’s desire for a fairy
tale ending with Lolita. Humbert begs the pregnant Lolita to run away with him “and we shall
live happily ever after” (Lolita 278). Although Lolita rejects Humbert’s “happily ever after,” the
murder scene is one almost ripped out from a fairy tale. When entering Pavor Manor,
uncoincidentally on “Grimm Road” (Lolita 292), Humbert says, “with a petulant snarl, I pushed
the front door—and, how nice, it swung open as in a medieval fairy tale” (Lolita 294).
Furthermore, the gun and its bullets link the two scenes. Nabokov does so directly when
“this time [Humbert] hit something hard. I hit the back of a black rocking chair, not unlike Dolly

25

Appel 439.

49
Schiller’s” (Nabokov, Lolita 302). Before Lolita’s last word, Humbert says, “[t]hen I pulled out
my automatic—I mean, this is the kind of fool thing a reader might suppose I did. It never even
occurred to me to do it” (Lolita 280). Although he refers to the gun only to emphasize the
absence of it from this goodbye, his following words contradict that remark. He immediately
describes Lolita as his “dead love; for she is dead and immortal if you are reading this” (Lolita
280)—almost as if he really had “pulled out [his] automatic.” The noun choice of “automatic”
rather than gun or Chum significantly returns in the Quilty scene. Humbert says, “the automatic
was again ready for use on the person” (Lolita 301). Here, the repetition of “automatic” followed
by a lack of specificity in “the person” enables the weapon’s target to be both Lolita and Quilty
simultaneously. Furthermore, “person” implies the physical body. Whereas a name would
encapsulate Quilty’s or Lolita’s entire being, “person” implies only that person’s physical self,
leaving a spiritual “immortal” (Lolita 280) side unharmed. Ultimately, it echoes
“Personne…Repersonne” (Lolita 269), the very first link that appears between the visits.

II
That Lolita, This “Lolita”
In the context of the passage, Humbert directly links the madrigal’s fragments to the
reasons that he is a failed poet. He begins,
I would like to describe her face, her ways—and I cannot, because
my own desire for her blinds me when she is near […] If I close my
eyes I see but an immobilized fraction of her, a cinematographic still
[…] “Dolores Haze” A poet à mes heures, I composed a madrigal
to the soot-black lashes of her pale-gray vacant eyes, to the five
asymmetrical freckles of her bobbed nose, to the blond down of her
brown limbs; but I tore it up and cannot recall it today. Only in the
tritest of terms (diary resumed) can I describe Lo’s features.
(Nabokov, Lolita 44)
He draws attention to his inability to remember the “tor[n] up” madrigal because it contradicts

50
his “photographic memory” (Lolita 40), with which he recreates the “diary” in question.
Humbert frames the remaining images of the poem, “to the soot-black lashes of her pale-gray
vacant eyes, to the five asymmetrical freckles of her bobbed nose, to the blond down of her
brown limbs,” with the notions of fragmentation and mortality. The fact that he can only see a
“fraction of her” means that he is incapable of capturing his entire beloved in a poem. However,
his forgettable, mortal work reflects his anguish that Lolita will not always be a nymphet.
In his opening paragraph, Humbert’s punctuation and language fragment the name
“Lolita” so that she is just a “fraction” (Nabokov, Lolita 44). After leaving her name intact as his
first word, he systematically dissects it: “Lolita […] Lo-lee-ta: the tip of the tongue taking a trip
of three steps down the palate to tap, at three, on the teeth. Lo. Lee. Ta.” (Lolita 1). While the
hyphens visually separate the name into three parts, they grammatically link those three syllables
by indicating that they have a combined meaning. The staccato alliteration of the letter “t” after
the colon illustrates that dual effect. By capitalizing the first letter and putting a period after the
last letter of each part, Humbert eliminates the previously implied, syntactic connection. After
fragmenting the name “Lolita,” Humbert continues, “She was Lo, plain Lo, in the morning,
standing four feet ten in one sock. She was Lola in slacks. She was Dolly at school. She was
Dolores on the dotted line. But in my arms she was always Lolita” (Lolita 9). Her multiple
names, each of which corresponds to a unique condition, reflects Humbert’s inability to capture
the whole of Lolita. He can only capture a “fraction” of Lo, of Lola, of Dolly, of Dolores, and
ultimately, of Lolita.
By splitting Lolita in two, Humbert links his failure to poetically capture Lolita to the fact
that she will not always be Lolita. When she leaves for camp, he tells his readers:
I knew I had fallen in love with Lolita forever; but I also knew she
would not be forever Lolita. She would be thirteen on January 1. In

51
two years or so she would cease being a nymphet and would turn
into a “young girl,” and then, into a “college girl”—that horror of
horrors. The word “forever” referred only to my own passion, to the
eternal Lolita as reflected in my blood. The Lolita whose iliac crests
had not yet flared, the Lolita that today I could touch and smell and
hear and see, the Lolita of the strident voice and the rich brown
hair—of the bangs and the swirls at the sides and the curls at the
back, and the sticky hot neck, and the vulgar vocabulary—
“revolting,” “super,” “luscious,” “goon,” “drip”—that Lolita, my
Lolita, poor Catullus would lose forever. (Nabokov, Lolita 65)
The antimetabole “Lolita forever…forever Lolita” reflects his central problem. In order to
capture Lolita in poetic immortality, she must be encased in the word “forever,” not the other
way around. The passage splits the physical “Lolita” who will grow up from an “eternal Lolita.”
He elaborates on her human form three times, each of which begins with the phrase “the Lolita.”
He defines her first by a part of her body that “ha[s] not yet” become something and then by his
ability to sensually connect with her. In his third and final version, she is “the Lolita of the
strident voice and the rich brown hair.” Significantly, the preposition “of” can express the
relationship between a general category and the thing being specified which belongs to that
bracket—in this case, Lolita and “voice and…hair,” respectively. Moreover, an additional “of”
makes that “voice and…hair” its own general category, to which an endless list of specificity
belongs. By calling the physical Lolita who will cease “that Lolita,” Humbert insinuates the
existence of a “th[is] Lolita” whom he might be able to immortalize in poetry.
During his final scene with Lolita, he reconstructs the poem’s fragments. When looking
at Lolita, Humbert says, “How simple! The moment, the death I had kept conjuring up for three
years was as simple as a bit of dry wood […] her palefreckled cheeks were hollowed” (Nabokov,
Lolita 269). Upon seeing the death of her nymphet stage, Humbert reclaims the “five
asymmetrical freckles” (Lolita 44) from the poem. The number five itself resurfaces: “‘Oh,
things…Oh, I—really I’—she uttered the ‘I’ as a subdued cry while she listened to the source of

52
the ache, and for lack of words spread the five fingers of her angularly up-and-down-moving
hand” (Lolita 276). Here, the proximity of an ellipsis and the three “[I’s]” evokes “Dolores on
the dotted line” (Lolita 1), which is the name Humbert uses right before mentioning the
destroyed madrigal. Right before giving new life to the rest of the poem, he uses his own “dotted
line:”
She was only the faint violet whiff and dead leaf echo of the
nymphet I had rolled myself upon with such cries in the past; an
echo on the brink of a russet ravine, with a far wood under a white
sky, and brown leaves choking the brook, and one last cricket in the
crisp weeds … but thank God it was not that echo alone that I
worshiped. (Lolita 277-278)
The ellipsis’ reminder of “Dolores on the dotted line” brings him out of the extended description
of the fact that she is only a “dead leaf echo of the nymphet.”
By resolving her dichotomous nature, he can now complete the poem using the name
“Lolita.” He continues, “I insist the world know how much I loved my Lolita, this Lolita, pale
and polluted, and big with another’s child, but still gray-eyed, still sooty-lashed” (Nabokov,
Lolita 278). The “soot-black lashes of her pale-gray eyes” (Lolita 44) of the madrigal’s fragment
come back to life, only this time as adjectives and adverbs. The “soot[iness]” of her lashes, and
the “lashes” themselves belong to all of Lolita rather than the “soot[y]-black[ness]” classifying
the “lashes” that are part of her “eyes.” As adjectival phrases, these features at last describe
Lolita as an entity thereby resolving the failure of the madrigal. Moreover, they return at the
moment he resolves his previous fear: “I knew I had fallen in love with Lolita forever; but I also
knew she would not be forever Lolita” (Lolita 44). He replicates the inversion between “Lolita
forever” and “forever Lolita” with “my Lolita, this Lolita” (Lolita 278) and the “that Lolita, my
Lolita” (Lolita 44) whom he believes he will lose.

53

III
The Man in the Mirror
Before turning to the murder scene, let us take a detour from explicating the duality of
Lolita to consider that of Humbert. As he does to Lolita, Humbert fragments his own identity by
referring to himself in both the first-person and the third-person. In selecting a pseudonym,
Humbert Humbert deliberately picks one that evokes that idea of a dual-self; there are two
Humberts. When reflecting on his split-self, he advises his reader to “take down the following
important remark: the artist in me has been given the upper hand over the gentleman” (Nabokov,
Lolita 71). There is the “he,” Humbert the man, which reflects his pseudonym’s resonance with
“hombre,” and there is “I,” Humbert the artist, writer, and poet.
Both Humbert’s physical self and his artistic self become doubled in the character Clare
Quilty. When looking at the picture of “a distinguished playwright” (Nabokov, Lolita 69),
Humbert acknowledges that he “resembl[es] [the man he does not know is Quilty]…slight[y]”
(Lolita 69). Without knowing that Lolita’s kidnapper is the man from the photo, Humbert says,
“the tone of his brain, had affinities with my own. He mimed and mocked me. His allusions were
definitely highbrow. He was well-read” (Lolita 249). Thus, Quilty also shares Humbert’s literary
side, both in “the tone of his brain” and in the fact that he is a writer. The reflection of Humbert
in Quilty becomes exact when they come face to face. In their “formless tussle” (Lolita 29), they
linguistically become one: “he rolled over me. I rolled over him. We rolled over me. They rolled
over him. We rolled over us” (Lolita 229). If Humbert merges with his double in this scene, then
whom does he kill?
At this juncture, let us note Humbert’s distinction between a physical and spiritual
relationship, and what that means for art. Humbert says, “Some day, Lo, you will understand

54
many emotions and situations, such as for example the harmony, the beauty of spiritual
relationship” (Nabokov, Lolita 112). Thus, a purely spiritual relationship is when the two people
form “harmony,” that is, blend into a coherent, artistic whole. A purely physical relationship—
sex without love—is “sterile selfish vice” (Lolita 278).
Just like Quilty the man who is “practically impotent” (Nabokov, Lolita 298), Quilty’s art
is infertile because it is precisely sex without love. After calling Quilty a “scenario writer [who
sits in a] low chair” (Lolita 299), Humbert immediately refers to himself as a “poe[t]” (Lolita
299). By calling his action against Quilty “poetical justice,” Humbert places his art on a
“[higher] chair” than that of his dopplegänger. In this context, by murdering Quilty, Humbert
figuratively kills the physical half of his identity whose existence had rendered his spiritual,
poetic self impotent. While Humbert kills part of himself in Quilty, Nabokov assassinates part of
someone else.
Let us begin by looking at the name Clare Quilty more closely. Clare county Ireland, in
which Quilty is a town, and Clare Street appear in Ulysses; each of the four references to Clare
concern Bloom directly or by extension.26 While naming his antagonist after a place in Ireland
and Ulysses can seem incidental, the special attention that Nabokov draws to Clare Street in his
Lectures on Literature suggest that it is much more. He tells his students:
then in section 17 Stephen’s Italian teacher walks and so does the
mad gentleman Farrell, with the long name. We shall soon realize

26

All references to Clare (county or street) in Ulysses: “—Well no, Mr Bloom said. In point of fact I have
to go down to the county Clare on some private business” (6.16-17); “—His father [Rudolph Bloom]
poisoned himself, Martin Cunningham whispered. Had the Queen's hotel in Ennis. You heard him say he
was going to Clare. Anniversary” (6.529-531); “He [Cashel Boyle O'Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell]
strode on for Clare street, grinding his fierce word. As he strode past Mr Bloom's dental windows the
sway of his dustcoat brushed rudely from its angle a slender tapping cane and swept onwards, having
buffeted a thewless body. The blind stripling turned his sickly face after the striding form.” (10.11141118); “The Queen's Hotel, Ennis, county Clare, where Rudolph Bloom (Rudolf Virag) died on the
evening of the 27 June 1886” (17.622-623).

55
that the most important synchronizing agent in the whole chapter is
the blind youth, the blind piano tuner, whom Bloom helped to cross
the street in an eastward direction, about two o’clock. Demented
Farrell now walks westward on Clare Street, while the blind youth
is walking eastward on the same street, still unaware that he has left
his tuning fork in the Ormond Hotel. Opposite number 8, the office
of a dentist Mr. Bloom, already referred to in the description of the
funeral procession, no relation to Leopold, mad Farrell brushes
against the frails oft body of the blind youth, who curses him.
(Nabokov, Lectures on Literature 334)
Earlier in his lectures, he annotates Joyce’s phrasing of that scene: “—[y]es the stripling
answered. South Frederick street. [Actually he heads for Clare Street.]” (Lectures on Literature
324); “Mr Bloom’s dental windows [another Bloom]” (Lectures on Literature 324).
Accordingly, Nabokov clearly thought about the character of Bloom and Clare Street. In fact, he
acknowledges the blind youth as “the most important synchronizing agent in the whole chapter,”
because he links Leopold Bloom to Mr. Bloom [“no relation to Leopold”] on Clare Street. Like
that Mr. Bloom, Ivor Quilty is a dentist. His nephew Clare bears the name of Mr. Bloom’s office
in Dublin. Perhaps, the image of “Clare the Impredictable s[itting] down before the piano and
play[ing] several atrociously vigorous, fundamentally hysterical, plangent chords” (Nabokov,
Lolita 302) alludes back to “the blind piano tuner” in Ulysses.
Nabokov calls attention to the faults that Bloom shares with his maker. On May 10th,
1954, around when he was completing Lolita, Nabokov gave his opening lecture on Joyce’s
masterpiece. Speaking of Leopold Bloom, Nabokov stated: “Joyce intended the portrait of an
ordinary person. [His] sexual deportment [is] extremely perverse…In Bloom’s (and Joyce’s)
mind, the theme of sex is mixed with theme of latrine.”27 On May 28th, the final class lecture,
analyzing the flaws of Ulysses, Nabokov complained about the “[o]bnoxious, overdone

27

Appel lii; from the annotator’s class notes, 1953-1954.

56
preoccupation with sex organs.”28
Clare Quilty reflects the perversity of Bloom and Joyce. For example, one of his plays is
“The Strange Mushroom” (Nabokov, Lolita 31). While the mushroom is a sex symbol in many
cultures, Nabokov specifies the image to Appel: “[s]omewhere, in a collection of ‘cases,’ I found
a little girl who referred to her uncle’s organ as ‘his mushroom.’”29 To Nabokov, by naming his
play, The Strange Mushroom, Quilty shares Joyce’s “preoccupation with sex organs.” In fact,
Quilty, pleading with Humbert, offers him a “young lady with three breasts” (Lolita 301) and
tries to tempt him with “an absolutely unique collection of erotica upstairs. Just to mention one
item: the in folio de-luxe Bagration Island by the explorer and psychoanalyst Melanie
Weiss…with photographs of eight hundred and something male organs she examined and
measured in 1932” (Lolita 302). Quilty echoes the “theme of latrine” as Humbert finds Quilty at
Pavor Manor coming out of a “bathroom” (Lolita 294). Humbert deems him “a complete freak in
sex matters” (Lolita 276); Quilty himself claims to have “made private movies out of Justine and
other eighteenth-century sexcapades” (Lolita 298). Humbert reveals that Quilty “did not use a
fountain pen which fact, as any psychoanalyst will tell you, meant that the patient was a
repressed undinist. One mercifully hopes there are water nymphs in the Styx” (Lolita 250).
Amending Appel’s annotation, Nabokov adds “the main point here is that ‘undinist’ is a person
(generally male) who is erotically excited by another person’s (generally female) making water
(Havelock Ellis was an ‘undinist,’ or ‘fountainist,’ and so was Leopold Bloom).”30 Here again,
Nabokov highlights the perversity that the fictional men, Bloom and Quilty, and Joyce share.

28

Appel liii; from the annotator’s class notes, 1953-1954.

29

Appel 349. For the letter in which Nabokov includes this anecdote, see Selected Letters, p. 408-409.

30

Appel 425. For the letter in which Nabokov includes this anecdote, see Selected Letters, p. 407.

57
While “[Quilty’s] allusions were definitely highbrow. He was well-read. He knew French. He
was versed in logodaedaly and logomancy” (Lolita 249-250), these complementary
characteristics, all of which can be said of Joyce as well, are empty praises as they do not apply
to the writer’s art.
Humbert reflects his creator’s artistic vision when it comes to sex and sexual organs. In
response to a question posed by an interviewer from Playboy, Nabokov said, “[s]ex as an
institution, sex as a general notion, sex as a problem, sex as a platitude—all this is something I
find too tedious for words. Let us skip sex” (Nabokov, Strong Opinions 23). Likewise, Humbert
notes that he is “not concerned with so-called ‘sex’ at all. Anybody can imagine those elements
of animality” (Nabokov, Lolita 134). Despite their different sexual proclivities, the two share a
philosophy as artists. In fact, through Humbert, Nabokov parodies Joyce’s affinity for sexual
organs. Humbert says, “my only grudge against nature was that I could not turn my Lolita inside
out and apply voracious lips to her young matrix, her unknown heart, her nacreous liver, the seagrapes of her lungs, her comely twin kidneys” (Lolita 165). Rather than attempting to penetrate
her sexually, he fantasizes about penetrating the interior of her body through her internal organs.

IV
Hegelian Synthesis31

By resurrecting the fragments of his madrigal and reconstructing them in a way that
resolves their initial limitations, Humbert Humbert becomes a true poet and turns Lolita into an
immortal, poetic subject. After recreating his poem, Humbert transposes her rejection of him as a

31

Nabokov, Lolita 307.

58
lover into poetic success. In the first half of the book, he says, “hot, opalescent, thick tears that
poets and lovers shed” (Nabokov, Lolita 52). After she rejects him during their final meeting,
Humbert “br[eaks] into the hottest tears [he] ha[s] ever shed” (Lolita 279). While those tears
could have been the “hottest tears” of a lover, he ends the scene with an authentication of his
success as a poet. Although he does not literally “pul[l] out [his] automatic” (Lolita 280) before
Lolita’s last word, Humbert Humbert produces the same outcome by calling her his “sweet
immortal dead love; for she is dead and immortal if you are reading this” (Lolita 280). By
turning his readers’ suspicion that his murder victim is Lolita as a transition, Humbert intensifies
the significance of the poetic immortality that he grants her. Moreover, by placing the word
“love” in the center of an antimetabole, “immortal dead…dead and immortal,” he encases his
love of her within the immortality of poetry.
While recreating the madrigal’s description of Lolita on Killer street, on Grimm Road, he
transposes the failures that inhibited the initial poem onto Quilty. At the end of the forgotten
madrigal passage, Humbert admits that “[o]nly in the tritest of terms (diary resumed) can I
describe Lo’s features. I might say her hair is auburn, and her lips as red as licked red candy, the
lower one prettily plump—oh, that I were a lady writer who could have her pose naked in a
naked light! But instead I am lanky, big-boned, wooly-chested Humbert Humbert” (Nabokov,
Lolita 44). The end of the passage speaks in the conditional tense; he “might say” something; he
could say something if he “were a lady writer.” However, he is “big-boned wooly-chested
Humbert Humbert.” Each phrase is a compound which reflects the dichotomous nature of his
being as both man and artist. Ultimately, he attributes the failure of his poem to the fact that, he
is “lanky, big-boned, wooly-chested Humbert Humbert.” In the Schiller scene, the only time he
refers to himself as the compound, “Humbert Humbert,” appears directly before he sits in the

59
rocking chair and thinks about killing Quilty: “drove to wherever the beast’s lair was—and then
pulled the pistol’s foreskin back, and then enjoyed the orgasm of the crushed trigger” (Lolita
274). In fact, he never refers to himself as “Humbert Humbert” again in the remaining pages, all
of which he writes in the first person. The man, the “big-boned wooly-chested Humbert
Humbert” (Lolita 44), transposes his “wooly-chested” appearance onto Quilty’s “hirsute chest”
(Lolita 295). In doing so, Humbert resolves his dichotomy so that he is singularly an artist.

V
Quilty or Not Quilty?
“To fill in the pause,” Humbert says, “I proposed he read his own sentence—in the poetical
form I had given it. The term “poetical justice” is one that may be most happily used in this
respect. I handed him a neat typescript” (Nabokov, Lolita 299). Quilty, reading his death
sentence aloud, says, “because you took advantage of my disadvantage…” (Lolita 299). Here,
Humbert’s poem turns to chess terminology,32 just as he stores Chum in a chess box.
The rivalry between Humbert and Quilty is ultimately a giant chess match, played across
the checkered board of America,33 which Humbert describes as a “crazy quilt of forty-eight
states” (Nabokov, Lolita 152). Later on in the description of “roads crisscrossing the crazy quilt
of dark and pale fields” (Lolita 307), the juxtaposition of dark and light patches, corresponding
to the black and white squares of chessboard, reinforces the comparison. Quilty is the ultimate
opponent as his very name symbolizes the structure of the board; after Lolita’s disappearance,

32

Field 327.

33

Appel lxv.

60
Humbert uses the term “moves” to map out his trailing of Quilty. When Humbert says, “did I
mention the name of that milk bar I visited a moment ago? It was, of all things, The Frigid
Queen. Smiling a little sadly, I dubbed her My Frigid Princess. She did not see the wistful joke”
(Lolita 166), Lolita becomes the Queen.
The seemingly never-ending match between Gaston Godin and Humbert Humbert
reinforces the chessboard structure of the novel.34 Their game emphasizes Lolita’s link to the
Queen and mirrors the murder at Pavor Manor. Upon hearing Lolita dance downstairs during one
of the games, Godin “rub[s] his head or cheek as if confusing those distant thuds with the awful
stabs of my formidable Queen” (Nabokov, Lolita 182). Another evening, when Humbert learns
Lolita missed her piano lesson again—a lie so bold that it signals that he will soon lose her—he
muses,
As the reader may well imagine, my faculties were now impaired,
and a move or two later, with Gaston to play, I noticed through the
film of my general distress that he could collect my queen; he
noticed it too, but thinking it might be a trap on the part of his tricky
opponent, he demurred for quite a minute, and puffed and wheezed,
and shook his jowls, and even shot furtive glances at me, and made
hesitating half-thrusts with his pudgily bunched fingers—dying to
take that juicy queen and not daring—and all of a sudden he
swooped down upon it (who knows if it did not teach him certain
later audacities?), and I spent a dreary hour in achieving a draw.
(Lolita 202-203).
At this moment in the narrative, while Gaston can “collect [Humbert’s] queen” on the board,
Quilty can take Lolita.
Nabokov revitalizes imagery from the actual chess match at Pavor Manor. Humbert first
sees Quilty in “the Oriental parlor” (Nabokov, Lolita 295), which echoes Godin’s “orientally

34

Appel lxv.

61
furnished den” (Lolita 181), and the replacement box for chessmen with an “elaborate Oriental
design over the lid” (Lolita 215) that he gives to Humbert. Quilty’s weak French harkens back to
the fact that Godin’s “English was a burlesque” (Lolita 181).
Nabokov often compares chess problems to literature. The most famous one being:
“competition in chess problems is not really between White and Black but between the
composer35 and the hypothetical solver (just as in a first-rate work of fiction the real clash is not
between the characters but between the author and the world)” (Nabokov, Speak Memory 290).
The notion that chess problems reflect the relationship between writer and reader have a double
meaning in the case of Lolita as both Humbert and Quilty become the other’s “reader.” In a
problem, the solver must discover how White can deliver mate in answer to Black’s moves
written by the composer. Thus, to a certain extent, the reader is White and the author is Black.
Those assigned roles reflect the relationship between Humbert and Quilty. Godin “always wore
black” (Nabokov, Lolita 181) during their matches which assigns Humbert to White. Until
arriving at Pavor Manor, Humbert remains the White king anxiously trying to deliver mate to the
playwright. However, during the murder scene, Humbert is “wearing a black suit, a black shirt,
no tie” (Lolita 295), and as Quilty reads his poetic sentence, he becomes the White solver to
Humbert’s Black composer.
More specifically, Nabokov believes that “problems are the poetry of chess”36 (Strong
Opinions 160). Guillén perfectly describes Nabokov as a “poet in two languages, in prose and in
verse, always a poet.”37 While Joyce writes poetic prose, Nabokov writes prosaic poetry. The

35

When describing his literary attempts, Humbert uses the verb “to compose.”

36

Nabokov repeats this phrase in Poems and Problems, p. 15.

37

Cited in Boyd, American Years 88.

62
Foreword contains no mention of the name Quilty except for “Vivian Darkbloom [an anagram
for the author’s name] has written a biography, ‘My Cue,’ to be published shortly, and the critics
who have perused the manuscript call it her best book. The caretakers of various cemeteries
involved report that no ghosts walk” (Nabokov, Lolita 4). In Lolita, Nabokov does in fact make
Joyce “[His] Cue.” Humbert gains peace of mind in knowing that he need not fear “an actual
visit from [Cue], with trouble on my part to rationalize him as not being a ghost” (Lolita 306).
Through writing Lolita, Nabokov has made sure that Joyce’s “ghost [no longer] walk[s].”

63

CONCLUSION
Humbert’s Lolita is not a tale of pedophilia, but is a tale of art. His attraction to the body
of his nymphet, “Dolores on the dotted line” (Nabokov, Lolita 1), is really a desire for a
metatextual figure. He describes her arms and legs as having “scratches like tiny dotted lines of
coagulated rubies” (Lolita 111). Thus, her body mirrors writing itself with its “dotted lines in
varicolored inks” (Lolita 102). She also symbolizes a book like the “coffin-black volume almost
as big as Lolita” (Lolita 262) that Humbert reads. By the end of the narrative, Humbert brings
that image to fruition: “When I started, fifty-six days ago, to write Lolita” (Lolita 308); she is
both “Lolita” and “Lolita.” Humbert symbolizes a writer as he “talk[s] like a book” (Lolita 114).
Therefore “this book is about Lolita” (Lolita 253) but is also “[Humbert’s] story” (Lolita 308). It
is the tale of writer and work.
While Joyce calls Ulysses the “epic of the human body,” at first glance, it seems to be the
epic of what is inside that body. Joyce’s schemata assign specific bodily organs to all of the
chapters in which Bloom appears (ch. 4-18). The language enacts the bodily functions; the
sentences ruminate, embodying Bloom chewing his lunch; they spasm with locomotor ataxia in
“Circe”; they orgasm in “Nausicaa”:
And she saw a long Roman candle going up over the trees, up, up,
and, in the tense hush, they were all breathless with excitement as it
went higher and higher and she had to lean back more and more to
look up after it, high, high, almost out of sight, and her face was
suffused with a divine, an entrancing blush from straining back and
he could see her other things too, nainsook knickers, the fabric that
caresses the skin, better than those other pettiwidth, the green, four

64
and eleven, on account of being white and she let him and she saw
that he saw and then it went so high it went out of sight a moment
and she was trembling in every limb from being bent so far back that
he had a full view high up above her knee where no-one ever not
even on the swing or wading and she wasn't ashamed and he wasn't
either to look in that immodest way like that because he couldn't
resist the sight of the wondrous revealment half offered like those
skirtdancers behaving so immodest before gentlemen looking and
he kept on looking, looking. She would fain have cried to him
chokingly, held out her snowy slender arms to him to come, to feel
his lips laid on her white brow, the cry of a young girl's love, a little
strangled cry, wrung from her, that cry that has rung through the
ages. And then a rocket sprang and bang shot blind blank and O!
then the Roman candle burst and it was like a sigh of O! and
everyone cried O! O! in raptures and it gushed out of it a stream of
rain gold hair threads and they shed and ah! they were all greeny
dewy stars falling with golden, O so lovely, O, soft, sweet, soft!
(Ulysses 13.719-740)
The long sentences reflect the build “up, up” as the body approaches climax. The clauses in
between the commas become smaller and smaller until they are just a few, echoing words—“the
cry of a young girl’s love, a little strangled cry,…that cry.” And they culminate, screaming with
short bursts, free of capital letters apart from the “O!”…the “O!”…the “O!” As the novel
progresses, the organs get closer to the exterior body—the final two being skeleton and flesh,
respectively. The cover that holds the inner contents of Ulysses is that body.
Nabokov turns the body into text; Joyce turns text into the body. Lolita is truly “The
Portrait of Ulysses in a Mirror.” This literary mirror reverses, inverts, reflects. Both Nabokov and
Joyce live in a mirror world; they see with mirror eyes.
The mirror is a metaphor for the literary text. It conveys the nature of metafiction by
highlighting the distinction between reality and perception. Perception itself reflects the role of
the author who observes and captures that interpretation—not the thing itself. We do not see
ourselves in a mirror, we see our reflections in which right becomes left and left becomes right.
We see a distortion of ourselves; we see our own fiction. And yet, mirrors represent a kind of

65
knowledge, a truth otherwise imperceptible. They embody the central dichotomies of the world:
imitation and imitated, identity and separation, the self and the other, male and female, right and
wrong. In their reflections, mirrors possess the power of re-creation, which goes to the heart of
intertextuality.

67

WORKS CONSULTED
Alexandrov, Vladimir E., ed. The Garland Companion to Vladimir Nabokov. New York:
Garland Pub., 1995. Print.
———. Nabokov's Otherworld. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991. Print.
Bloom, Harold. The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1997. Print.
———, ed. Vladimir Nabokov. New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1987. Print.
Borges, Jorge Luis. Labyrinths: Selected Stories & Other Writings. Ed. James E.
Irby and Donald A. Yates. New York: New Directions, 1964. Print.
Boyd, Brian. Nabokov's Pale Fire: The Magic of Artistic Discovery. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1999. Print.
———. Vladimir Nabokov: The American Years. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991.
Print.
———. Vladimir Nabokov: The Russian Years. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990.
Print.
Connolly, Julian W., ed. The Cambridge Companion to Nabokov. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2005. Print.
———, ed. Nabokov and his Fiction: New Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999. Print.
Field, Andrew. Nabokov: His Life in Art; A Critical Narrative. Boston: Little, Brown, 1967.
Print.

68
Fisher, Will. “The Renaissance Beard: Masculinity in Early Modern England.” Renaissance
Quarterly 54.1 (2001): 155–187. Web.
Frosch, Thomas R. “Parody and Authenticity in Lolita.” Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita: A Casebook.
Ed. Ellen Pifer. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 39-56. Print.
Gifford, Don, and Robert J. Seidman. Ulysses Annotated: Notes for James Joyce's Ulysses.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988. Print.
Grabes, Herbert. Fictitious Biographies: Vladimir Nabokov's English Novels. Trans. Herbert
Grabes and Pamela Gliniars. The Hague: Mouton, 1977. Studies in American Literature
XXV. Print.
Joyce, James. Dubliners. New York: Penguin Group, 1993. Print.
———. Finnegans Wake. New York: Penguin Group, 1999. Print.
———. A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. New York: Penguin Group, 2003. Print.
———. Ulysses: The Corrected Text. Ed. Hans Walter Gabler, Wolfhard Steppe, and Claus
Melchior. New York: Vintage Books, 1986. Print.
Killeen, Terence. "Nabokov…Léon…Joyce." Irish Times [Dublin] 13 June 1992. Web.
Morris, Paul Duncan. Vladimir Nabokov: Poetry and the Lyric Voice. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2010. Print.
Moynahan, Julian. Vladimir Nabokov. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1971. Print.
Nabokov, Vladimir Vladimirovich. Despair. New York: Random House, Inc., 1989. Print.
———. The Enchanter. New York: Vintage Books, 1991. Print.
———. Glory. New York: Vintage Books, 1991. Print.
———. Lectures on Literature. Ed. Fredson Bowers. New York: Harcourt, Inc., 1980. Print.

69
———. Lectures on Russian Literature. Ed. Fredson Bowers. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich/Bruccoli Clark, 1981. Print.
———. Lectures on Ulysses: A Facsimile of the Manuscript. Bloomfield Hills: Bruccoli Clark
Publishers, 1980. Print.
———. Lolita. New York: Random House, Inc., 1997. Print.
———. Lolita: A Screenplay. New York: Vintage Books, 1997. Print.
———. Nabokov's Butterflies: Unpublished and Uncollected Writings. Ed. Brian Boyd and
Robert Michael Pyle. Trans. Dmitri Nabokov. Boston: Beacon Press, 2000. Print.
———. Notes on Prosody, and Abram Gannibal: From the Commentary to the Author's
Translation of Pushkin's Eugene Onegin. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964.
Print.
———. Pale Fire. New York: Random House, Inc., 1989. Print.
———. Poems and Problems. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2012. Print.
———. Selected Poems. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981. Print.
———. Speak, Memory: An Autobiography Revisited. New York: Random House, Inc., 1989.
Print.
———. Strong Opinions. New York: Vintage Books, 1990. Print.
———. Vladimir Nabokov: Selected Letters 1940-1977. Ed. Dmitri Nabokov and Matthew J.
Bruccoli. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1989. Print.
Nabokov, Vladimir Vladimirovich, and Alfred Appel, Jr. The Annotated Lolita. New York:
Vintage Books, 1991. Print.
Nabokov, Vladimir Vladimirovich, et al. Dear Bunny, Dear Volodya: The
Nabokov-Wilson Letters, 1940-1971. Rev. and expanded ed. Berkeley: University of

70
California Press, 2001. Print.
Naiman, Eric. Nabokov, Perversely. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2010. Print.
Proffer, Carl R. Keys to Lolita. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1968. Print.
Rampton, David. Vladimir Nabokov: A Literary Life. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.
Print.
Schmidt, Michael. The Novel: A Biography. Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 2014. Print.
Schuman, Samuel. Nabokov’s Shakespeare. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing Inc., 2014. Print.
Shakespeare, William. The Complete Signet Classic Shakespeare. Ed. Sylvan Barnet. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovic, Inc., 1972. Print.
———. Shakespeare's Sonnets. Ed. Katherine Duncan-Jones. London: Thomas Nelson and
Sons, 1997. Print.
Shapiro, Gavriel. "'Lolita' Class List." Cahiers du Monde russe 37.3 (1996): 317-35. Web.
Stegner, Page. Escape into Aesthetics: The Art of Vladimir Nabokov. New York: Dial Press,
1966. Print.
Stuart, Dabney. Nabokov: The Dimensions of Parody. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1978. Print.
Wood, Michael. The Magician's Doubts: Nabokov and the Risks of Fiction. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1995. Print.
Wyllie, Barbara. Vladimir Nabokov. London: Reaktion, 2010. Print.

