Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

The Sound and the Fury: A Screenplay Adaptation
Brenna Kouf
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Kouf, Brenna, "The Sound and the Fury: A Screenplay Adaptation" (2011). Senior Projects Spring 2011. Paper 231.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/231

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

!

"!

The Sound and the Fury:
A Screenplay Adaptation

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College
by
Brenna Kouf

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2011

!

!

#$%&'()&*+!(+%!,'-+*./$%01$+)2!

"!

!
34&2!56*7$')!&2!%$%&'()$%!)*!18!9()4$6:!.4*!&+2)&//$%!&+!1$!)4$!/*;$!*9!.6&)&+0!(+%!
9&/1:!(+%!)*!18!1*)4$6!(+%!2)$51*)4$6:!.4*!6$(%!$;$68!%6(9)!*9!)4$!2'6$$+5/(8!*6!
&+)6*%<')&*+:!+*!1())$6!4*.!<+$+7*8(=/$!)4$!56*'$22>!?!.*</%!(/2*!/&-$!)*!)4(+-!18!
.4*/$!9(1&/8:!.4*2$!%&;$62&)8!(+%!<+'*+;$+)&*+(/&)8!4(2!4$/5$%!1$!(556$'&()$!)4$!
&%&*28+'6(2&$2!*9!9(1&/8!%8+(1&'2>!!
!
?!.*</%!(/2*!/&-$!)*!('-+*./$%0$!)46$$!56*9$22*62!.4*2$!4$/5!(+%!$+'*<6(0$1$+)!
4(;$!1(%$!)4&2!56*7$')!5*22&=/$>!@&62)!?!.(+)!)*!)4(+-!18!(%;&2$6:!A*2$54!B<CC&:!.4*!
(06$$%!)*!/$)!1$!.6&)$!(+!(%(5)()&*+>!D&2!9(&)4!&+!18!56*7$')!0(;$!1$!2$'<6&)8!(+%!
4*5$!%<6&+0!(!)&1$!.4$+!?!.(2!<+2<6$!*9!)4$!*<)'*1$>!E$'*+%/8:!?!.*</%!/&-$!)*!
)4(+-!18!52$<%*F(%;&2$6:!G(6&$!H$0(+:!.4*2$!1$+)*624&5!?!'*</%!+*)!%*!.&)4*<)>!
D$6!)$('4&+0!'4(//$+0$%!1$!&+!.(82!)4()!(6$!&+;(/<(=/$!)*!18!.6&)&+0!I!+*)!*+/8!
2'6$$+.6&)&+0:!=<)!(/2*!18!56*2$>!J*!1())$6!4*.!'*+9<2$%!*6!<+'*19*6)(=/$!?!9$/):!
24$!4$/5$%!1$!5$62$;$6$!)46*<04!'*<+)/$22!.6&)$6K2!=/*'-2!.&)4!4$6!-&+%!.*6%2!*9!
$+'*<6(0$1$+)>!,+%!/(2)!*9!(//:!?!.*</%!/&-$!)*!)4(+-!J(+'8!B$*+(6%:!.4*!4$/5$%!1$!
=$/&$;$!?!'*</%!.6&)$!()!(//>!!

!

!

"!

Table of Contents
I: Introduction
II: The Sound and the Fury: an adapted screenplay
!

!

!

"!

Introduction
William Faulkner’s The Sound and The Fury is the arguably the most cinematic
of all his novels. Its four different narrative voices that straddle past and present,
objectivity and subjectivity, apply the visual techniques of a film in the linguistic context
of literature. However, it is at times jarring and difficult to determine truth, space or time
with visual language, divorced of the visual aid. When the collision of time and space is
subtracted from Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury, what remains is a story, not quite
plot-oriented, of dramatic irresolution. The tension in Faulkner’s novel resides in the
juxtaposition of time, space, present tense, memory and variety of narrative voices.
Faulkner’s cinematic techniques serve to tell a visual story that appeals more to
senses and emotions rather than to intellect. The novel is viscerally rich and forces the
reader to use sensory memory and imagination to see, hear and even smell the scene.
While the novel demands mental flexibility and imagination, the fundamental
requirement is sensory attention. In this sense, the novel is already a type of screenplay: a
story written out on a page whose culmination as a film is meant to give the viewer a
visual and aural experience.
The process of adapting a literary work to the stage or screen requires difficult
choices; literature is not confined by time or production constraints, and the author of a
book is free to roam wherever his pen may take him. If the dramatic structure is relatively
weak in a novel, it may not affect the story, but if a play or screenplay attempts the same
approach the structural weakness is soon evident. It is easier to continue reading a novel
without much of a story, as long as it is written well, than it is to watch a film without
much of a story that is only filmed well. This is because a novel is able to convey more

!

!

"!

meaning through language and freedom of length, than a film can convey through an
image under time constraints. This is precisely why The Sound and the Fury could, in
theory, be a comprehensive and successful film. Since the language Faulkner uses is
inherently sensory, translating the story to an image would be like killing two birds with
one stone, the best of both worlds. The poetic visuals of memory and the juxtaposition of
time and space can not only be conveyed, but also made clearer, while the essence still
remains in tact.
While one may imbed their perspective in an original piece of work, an adaptor
translates that perspective into another medium, while inevitably adding another layer of
perspective. A novel holds a different meaning for each individual person, and a film
adaptation of a novel is certainly not an all-encompassing, perfect translation of its
content. In 1959 Martin Ritt directed an adaptation of The Sound and the Fury, written
by Harriet Frank Jr. and Irving Ravetch. Their adaptation is a reorganizing of their
perspectives of Faulkner’s story – their attempt to take the novel’s essence and translate it
into their artistic medium. My adaptation is what I understand to be the essence of the
story, and to the best of my ability, what I believe Faulkner was trying to convey.
It is also important to note the possible difference of circumstances of adaptation.
Sometimes an artist may create something that doesn’t necessarily convey his personal
sense of reality. Art can be created to cater to a specific audience, and the creator could
be completely removed from the product itself. For example, an adaptation such as Ritt’s,
created for commercial entertainment and revamped to please an audience, abides by
different codes than a college student’s adaptation.

!

!

"!
In his essay, Tomorrow: The Genesis of a Screenplay, Horton Foote points out

why the process of creating an original work is different from adapting in terms of the
reality called upon. He believes that when an artist works on something of his own, the
unconscious is at work, whereas with adaptations, the work is purely conscious. An
adapter must consciously approach an unconscious process (Foote 149). In fact, in the
unpublished introduction Faulkner wrote for the immaterialized 1933 limited edition of
The Sound and the Fury, he wrote: “I had no plan at all in mind when I began the book. I
wasn’t even writing a book.” He then continues to connect the process of writing the
novel to his unconscious: “I wasn’t consciously writing anything to be printed” (Cohen
and Fowler 270).
It was after he finished writing the first/Benjy’s section of the novel that
Faulkner’s writing became a kind of adaptation in itself. The work then became
conscious because he tried to adapt Benjy’s section into a more coherent narrative told in
three sections that could be published. While adapting The Sound and the Fury, I felt that
I was using both approaches: consciously trying to transfer the essence of the original
while unconsciously attempting to sort out my own relationship with the novel.
In his book Faulkner and Film, Kawin suggests that Faulkner’s Hollywood career
is not what established Faulkner’s place in film history, but rather his novels created
independently from Hollywood. His screenplays are not recognizably his because of his
experimental use of time and space or his visual techniques, but because they flesh out
the subject matter of his fiction (Kawin 145). However his role as a contributor to film is
eminent in the influence he had on artists such as Howard Hawks, Orson Welles, Agnes

!

!

"!

Varda, Alain Resnais, Marguerite Duras and Jean-Luc Godard; all of which are
filmmakers who adapted his techniques instead of his fiction.
Resnais’ Hiroshima Mon Amour and Ritt’s The Sound and the Fury were both
released in1959. Kawin points out that Resnais’ film “has more in common with
Faulkner’s novel than does [Ritt’s film]” (Kawin 144). Kawin believes most films that set
out to adapt Faulkner fail to do so because they reject his techniques. This is why Kawin
prefers Faulkner’s influential techniques applied to film rather than his stories stripped of
their chaotic montage of time and space, which helps progress and enrich film because
the viewer can learn “from Faulkner’s aesthetic, independent of his stories, and go on to
explore and perhaps expand the range of verbal and visual signification in film” (Kawin
153).
The first two narratives of the novel (Benjy and Quentin) are the most difficult to
understand because of the juxtaposition of time and space, while the last two narratives
(Jason and a third-person narrator) are the most fluid and comprehensible. The time/space
juxtaposition occurs less as the novel continues, and by the end there are only present
accounts of the story with no flashbacks; the novel starts off with confusing, jumbled
narratives and then slowly becomes clearer. However, the first two sections are the most
objective since they are shown through visual flashbacks, told with almost no emotional
input, while the last two narratives are subjective and anecdotal.
Benjy Compson, the mentally disabled, youngest Compson son, objectively states
his surroundings in terms of his senses. He is unaware of his emotions; he only
understands the world in terms of sensory experiences. His dominant sense is the visual,
yet we are only granted the description of this sense through the transcriber/Faulkner’s

!

!

"!

language. In a certain way, Benjy’s section is in itself an adaptation because Benjy does
not have the ability to transcribe his own narrative with language; therefore his
consciousness is translated into language by the adaptor.
Benjy’s mind has only one tense (Kawin 120). He jumps back and forth between
the present and his memories, but he lives his thoughts so completely that they are
indistinguishable. Therefore, the visual/film version of Benjy’s narrative would be more
fluid and comprehensible and the progression of the cuts would be clear. When Benjy
plays in the creek with his caretaker in his adult life, his narrative jumps without warning
to a memory of him playing in the same creek with his siblings in his youth. A similar
sentence, place or smell sends Benjy into another moment that he lives fully, as if it were
the present. However, the transfer of his objective descriptions to visual images may not
be as fruitful, since the little emotion he does convey in his narrative would be lost
without voice-over. For example, throughout the narrative he repeatedly states “Caddy
smells like trees.” This could not be perfectly shown in a film, though perhaps implied.
In my adaptation, whenever Benjy and Caddy are together they are outdoors and
Caddy typically stands in front of a tree, seen through Benjy’s point of view. I also
attempt to keep the juxtaposition/montage of time and space from Benjy’s section
through flashbacks, most occur within the first act of the script and fewer as the story
progresses. When Benjy abruptly switches from the present to a memory, we have to wait
for clues (people, places, names etc.) until we realize the tense has changed. It works the
same way in film: it is only through visual context that a scene is understood as past,
present or future. Faulkner developed a narrative mode that cannot be called anything but
cinematic, since it uses the mind’s eye and the physical eye, all part of instantaneous cuts.

!

!

"!
Another visual technique Faulkner applies is stream of consciousness. It is a

literary style that is most like the imagery used in film since thoughts can be interpreted
as a continuous visual narrative that plays uninterrupted in the mind. The way Benjy’s
narrative is structured is through the transcribing of his rich panorama of images playing
out in his mind; transcribed by the author because he lacks the ability to apply words to
his experiences.
Quentin’s section is also very cinematic, since his memories, thoughts and
sensory perceptions oscillate in and out of each other. Stream of consciousness shows us
his frantic assimilation between his life in Cambridge and his memories and thoughts of
Caddy. He smells her, sees her and thinks about her as he internally processes his present
life. For example, when Quentin reads Caddy’s wedding invitation he reads the words on
the letter, but Caddy interrupts his thoughts through his senses:
Roses. Roses. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of. Roses. Not virgins like
dogwood, milkweed. I said I have committed incest, Father
I said. Roses. (Faulkner 77)
The repetition of the word “roses” symbolizes the smell Quentin associates with Caddy.
While he reads the letter, he is physically affected and his narrative is interrupted by his
sensory memory. Reading Caddy’s wedding invitation reminds him of a smell/object he
associates with her, and then reminds him of a conversation he had with his father about
Caddy’s virginity and incest. Quentin is more consciously aware of emotions and senses
and how they relate to what occurs to him in the exterior world. Unlike Benjy, Quentin’s
narrative is more subjective because he relates emotionally what happens in the exterior

!

!

"#!

world to his past: his emotions link his present to his memories, as opposed to Benjy,
whose senses provide the link. In my adaptation, Benjy’s flashbacks are caused by
sensory cues while Quentin’s flashback occurs through an emotional connection during
his stream of consciousness.
The last half of my adaptation gives more space to Jason and the narrative of the
Compson family as a character itself. The structure only includes one flashback and
keeps with novel’s progression of clarity. The tension lies in the parallel between the
crumbling of the south and how the Compson family fails to persevere. Even though
every member of the family consciously wants to help save the family as a whole, they
each unconsciously suffocate each other in the process. This is evident in Mrs.
Compson’s desire to further the family’s social reputation and in turn hurting the
members of her family, Mr. Compson’s desire to guide his children down the right path
while he is incapable of providing any help on an emotional level, Quentin’s desire to
keep the family’s honor while placing all importance on Caddy’s virginity, Jason’s desire
to advance himself and the family and in turn becomes a bitter and controlling man.
Benjy and Caddy are the only characters that have no evil intentions, yet somehow
acquire most of the burden and punishment.
After reading it countless times, The Sound and the Fury continues to frustrate
and fascinate me, not only because of the rich family dynamic, but also because of the
portrayal of women, mainly Caddy. Caddy’s character is drawn up through the narratives
of her three brothers. She does not have much dialogue, she does not have her own
narrative, and she is absent for most of the novel. In silencing Caddy, Faulkner only lets
the reader see her through the lens of the men in her life. In her book, Faulkner and

!

!

""!

Southern Womanhood, Diane Roberts interprets this censoring as “no room for female
desire…no space for Caddy’s subjectivity, her version of her story” (Roberts 111). Caddy
never gets the chance to explain her side of the story, because Faulkner idealizes her and
wishes to keep her silent.
However, Caddy’s presence is the driving force of the story and her actions propel
the fate of her entire family. Caddy’s absent presence controls three different male
narratives: each of the Compson brothers wants to control Caddy, who desires freedom.
When Caddy is damned and excommunicated by her family, it is not the result of her
being evil, but because of her attempt to claim her sexuality. Caddy is surrounded by
people who want to control her – and if they can’t control her they want to destroy her;
but her conflict is that they are all people she loves.
Similarly, Benjy is also made a non-entity by his family. When he tries to be
“affectionate” with a girl he mistakes for Caddy, they assume he tried to rape her and
they castrate him. This suggests that, in the Old South, a verbally handicapped person
was on the same level as a woman. Both are subjected to the demands of others and both
are silenced in some way – Caddy by not having her own narrative, and Benjy by not
having the capacity to speak. The title of the novel comes from Shakespeare’s play
Macbeth, where in scene five of the fifth act, Macbeth states:
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.

!

!

"#!

Benjy is described as an idiot in the novel – his moans and his inability to communicate
definitely causes “sound and fury” for him and the rest of the family. However, Caddy
and Benjy, the two silenced characters in the novel, have the loudest narratives; they
relate most of the truth and power of the story itself.
Moreover, Caddy’s turbulent sexuality disturbs her brothers and creates situations
that cause their destructions, while suggesting an inherent duality within her: her
presence and absence, her seduction and her maternal nurturing. Benjy depends on Caddy
for maternal love, Quentin idealizes her and wants to protect her and Jason sees Caddy as
something that can be used for material gain. When they project their desires on her and
she does not comply, they self-destruct.
Caddy acts as a symbol for one of the main social revolutions of the Old South:
the fall of the Southern Belle as directly correlated with the rise of female sexuality.
Roberts believes that Caddy’s loss of virginity can be seen as her expulsion from the
Garden of Eden. In The Sound and the Fury, moral strength translated into sexual chastity
is something that is “nostalgically compared to the sexual permissiveness” of the present
(Roberts 105). Faulkner’s depiction of Caddy is a loaded historical figure; she marks the
transition in upper-class southern chastity to the dangerous territory where the female
body is more powerful than ever.
Quentin’s relationship with Caddy is particularly illuminating in terms of what is
expected of women. In the appendix Faulkner wrote for The Sound and the Fury in , he
states that Caddy loved Quentin, even though he was incapable of love and she accepted
the fact that “he must value above all not her but the virginity of which she was custodian
and on which she placed no value” (Faulkner 710). Quentin gives Caddy’s virginity a

!

!

"#!

value that exceeds her worth as a person; it symbolizes the family’s honor and reflects the
ideals of the old south. When he finds out Caddy is no longer a virgin, Quentin feels the
values of the external world crumbling, therefore causing him to breakdown and
surrender to the death of romantic ideals. Caddy can no longer be trafficked, used to
improve the family’s honor in society through marriage.
Mrs. Compson’s paradoxical character is also worth examining. Roberts explains
that Mrs. Compson, a victim of the trafficking of women, “ironically responds to
[Caddy’s] now-valueless state most viciously” (Roberts 112) by claiming that Caddy is
biologically polluted. Mrs. Compson’s response to Caddy’s impurity could be her
jealousy of Caddy’s freedom. Mrs. Compson is a cold and unloving woman who carried
out all of the expected duties of a woman and always obeyed society’s rules. When her
daughter completely ignores that which society holds in high esteem, Mrs. Compson is
embittered and indignant. Caddy’s worth in society is void since she is no longer a virgin
– she cannot be traded to a husband in exchange for social or economic power for the
whole family. Mrs. Compson, having been trafficked by her Bascomb family to the
higher, aristocratic Compsons, rejects Caddy because she refuses to be used the same
way.
Roberts makes the connection between Mrs. Compson’s sexuality and Caddy’s
through their relationship with beds (Roberts 196). As a hypochondriac, Mrs. Compson
rules her household from her bed. Through Mrs. Compson’s appropriation of her bed, it
is seen as a place of sickly domination. As a trafficked woman, marriage is not based on
love, but on social or financial gain. Moreover, sex is not based on love, but solely on
procreation – to produce an heir for the man who “bought” her. Since Mrs. Compson has

!

!

"#!

desexualized beds, Caddy seems to meet her boyfriends everywhere except in a bed – she
always meets them somewhere outdoors.
The role of women in The Sound and the Fury is made even more present by the
fact that Faulkner admitted that the story began with an image of a doomed little girl, one
whose sexuality would be the cause of her own family’s downfall. The scene he thought
of that propelled the novel is when the Compson children are playing in the creek and
Caddy’s underwear is muddied. Caddy muddies her drawers, the symbol of her soiled
purity, which causes Quentin to slap her. She later breaks a rule by climbing up a tree to
look in on their grandmother’s funeral. Through this one simple image, Faulkner proves
his ability to capture the essence of an entire novel in a single picture. Indeed this scene
holds every theme in the book: sex, death, control and rebellion. In his unpublished
introduction, he reinforces the power of the image and claims that the characters he
created and their relationships were “absolutely right and absolutely beautiful…[they]
postulated themselves in a picture [so explicable] that it could be acted by lay figures and
caught without dialogue by a camera” (Cohen and Fowler 269).
To Faulkner, Caddy’s image was perfectly malleable to visually, and
metaphorically, represent three aspects of the mother figure. Quentin “loved her…as a
lover would,” Jason “loved her with the same hatred of jealous and outraged pride of a
father” and Benjy who “loved her with the complete mindlessness of a child” (Cohen and
Fowler 270). Their need for Caddy is the one connecting force between the brothers that
renders them fundamentally alike. Caddy functions as a stabilizing force for the novel,
and for Faulkner himself as a writer.

!

!

"#!
While writing his unpublished introduction, Faulkner had an epiphany. Five years

after he wrote the novel, he discovered the physical characteristic he believed all good
novels possessed. This being “the action, the desires of the people all came to one single
head, like that instant when a pot boils, in an anecdote so simple as to be possible or
actual, or at least credible, the experience of everyone who ever breathed” (Cohen and
Fowler 273). Faulkner acknowledges that the simplicity that makes a story good, what
makes a story relatable and human, is its ability to “not be the same picture to all who
read it…those who left the book with the same picture would not be moved the same
way” (Cohen and Fowler 273).
The role of one doomed little girl in the lives of her three brothers and the
destruction of the family is simple and relatable. Caddy represents everything femaleoriented that Faulkner repressed or harbored in his subconscious: the death of his
daughter, his turbulent marriage with his second wife and her subsequent suicide, his
regret that he never had a sister, the fall of the southern woman, the social remodeling of
the old south and the correlated liberation of feminine sexuality. His own human
experience is imbedded in Caddy.
Throughout the novel the rise of feminine sexuality is also correlated with the
tragic sense of loss. The sense of loss is greatly felt by the intrusion of reality upon the
Compson siblings’ childhood. Caddy’s sexual liberation and maturity initiates that
intrusion for Benjy and Quentin and the results of her sexuality affect Jason’s ambitions.
Aside from Dilsey, Caddy is the only warm, loving, vibrant person in the novel. Caddy
provides the female love and tenderness for her brothers that their mother, Mrs.
Compson, was incapable of giving. Caddy has compassion for her brothers, and her

!

!

"#!

dilemma is that she must sacrifice her own freedom and female sexuality if she is to keep
her brothers happy; but she is too passionate and full of life to do so. Her ability to love
and accept her sexuality is twisted into something corrupt by her family. The guilt her
family makes her feel drives her to frantically attempt to save her family from the
disgrace her actions have caused them (her marriage to Herbert and abandon of Miss
Quentin).
The novel can be interpreted as a social commentary, the deterioration of family
and the American south, as a metaphysical novel concerned with time and space or a
feminist commentary on the voice of women. All of these, however, touch upon a basic
theme: the tragic sense of loss. The three sections create a thematic progression by
presenting the three stages of development: the child’s mind (Benjy), the adolescent mind
(Quentin) and the adult mind (Jason). This progression suggests that with development,
there is a deterioration of emotional response.
Faulkner uses the past to reveal the vapidity of the present. An example of this is
Quentin’s character: his idealized notions of chivalry, honor and dignity within the social
structure of the “Old South” are romantic and adolescent. Quentin evokes a feeling about
the past that makes the present seem empty, but the past Faulkner uses to set off the
present in the novel is not a romanticizing of a historical past, but the immediate past of
the Compson children’s childhood. By juxtaposing the childhood past of the Compson
siblings with their present, the theme of deterioration and loss is established and it
becomes a story about the degeneration of a family and society.
During Quentin’s narrative, he and Mr. Compson turn to the topic of virginity.
While Quentin is preoccupied with his idealistic view of femininity and Caddy’s fall

!

!

"#!

from it, Mr. Compson states that virginity is an irrelevant concept. He states, “It means
less to women, Father said. He said it was men invented virginity, not women” (Faulkner
78). Mr. Compson says this in order to break down Quentin’s fixation on virginity. This
idea that men invented something that society covets and women must abide by is a
parallel to the fact that, much like a patriarchal society, Faulkner’s novel is only seen
through the eyes of men, while the women are mostly silent.
Caddy’s absence and the downfall of the southern belle affect Benjy and Quentin
in the same way. Through Caddy’s excommunication from the family because of her
sexuality, Benjy and Quentin lose love and stability. Jason, on the other hand, only loses
a job at the bank. Jason is the only one of the Compsons who functions in adulthood
because the vision of life he brings out of his childhood fits with the reality of the world.
The emotional connections that would have provided Jason with sufficient stability are
distorted during his childhood by Mrs. Compson’s inadequacy as a mother. She sets
Jason apart from the family out of her own sense of inferiority and makes it impossible
for him to establish an affectionate relationship with the other children.
This brings into question the role of the mother figure. While Mrs. Compson is
the biological mother of the Compson children, Dilsey and Caddy herself act more like
mothers to the three brothers. Dilsey provides structure and understanding while Caddy
provides affection and stability. Both Dilsey and Caddy think differently of the role of
women than does Mrs. Compson. While Mrs. Compson was trafficked into her marriage
and had children because it was what society expected of her, both Dilsey and Caddy had
children out of love, without regard for social expectations. Neither Dilsey nor Caddy
actively had the intent to determine their child’s place in a family or the world, like Mrs.

!

!

"#!

Compson did with Jason. This suggests that the social trade of women does not beget
content women, much less capable mothers.
The story of the Compson family is relatable, honest and simple. To paraphrase
Faulkner’s Nobel Prize acceptance speech, “the human heart in conflict with itself is the
only thing worth writing about, worth the agony and the sweat. The old verities and truths
of the heart, the universal truths – love and honor and pity and pride and compassion and
sacrifice.” The Sound and the Fury is about these conflicts and values put into context
with a changing social environment, a pivotal moment in the south’s history, women’s
history and the history of the United States in general. The novel ends with the
mysterious “New York, New York October 1928” a few empty lines after the last
sentence. New York was not the place where the story took place, and October 1928 is
four or five months after the latest day of the narrative. This suggests that this story is
eternal and could happen any time, any place; it is a story of eternal humanity and I hope
that in my adaptation I have done it some justice.

!

!

"#!
Bibliography

Cohen, Philip, and Doreen Fowler. “Faulkner's Introduction to The Sound and the Fury.”
Rev. of Introduction to The Sound and the Fury, by William Faulkner. American
Literature 62.2 (1990). JSTOR. Web. 26 Mar. 2011.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2926916>.
Faulkner, William. The Sound and the Fury. New York: Vintage International, 1984.
Print.
Faulkner, William. “Appendix: The Compsons.” The Portable Faulkner. Ed.
Malcolm Cowley. Kingsport: Kingsport Press, Inc., 1980. Print.
Foote, Horton. “Tomorrow: The Genesis of a Screenplay.” Faulkner, Modernism
and Film: Faulkner and Yorknapatawpha 1978. Ed. Evans Harrington and Ann
J. Abadie. Jackson: University of Mississippi, 1979. Print.
Kawin, Bruce. Faulkner and Film. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1977.
Print.
Roberts, Diane. Faulkner and Southern Womanhood. Athens: Georgia Press, 1994. Print.

!

THE SOUND AND THE FURY
an adapted screenplay by
Brenna Kouf

Brenna Kouf
10061 Riverside Dr.
Los Angeles, CA 91602
(818) 219 4055
bk368@bard.edu

BLACK SCREEN
We hear crickets CHIRP and leaves RUSTLING.
EXT. PASTURE - MORNING
BENJY, 16, walks up a grassy hill, his gaze on the ground.
He wears faded overalls, a stained white shirt and he is
barefoot. His unkempt blond, curly hair surrounds his pale
face.
We hear a loud WHACK.

Four.

(yells)

GOLFER'S VOICE (O.S.)

As Benjy walks over the hill, the bright sun shines in his
eyes. Squinting, he stops and stands with his hand covering
most of his face from the sun. A RED RIBBON is tied around
his wrist.
He stares at a large colonial MANSION, the epitome of a
romanticized southern estate.
A GOLF BALL lands a few feet away from his feet. He looks
down at the golf ball, then looks away and stares at-An expansive golf course with a few flags protruding from
the ground.
(yells)
Caddie.

GOLFER'S VOICE (O.S.) (CONT'D)

Benjy squeezes his eyes shut and MOANS.
with his hands.

He rubs his face

BLACK SCREEN
Crickets CHIRP. Frogs CROAK. Water TRICKLES in a creek.
hear CHILDREN'S VOICES.
Caddy.

CHILD'S VOICE (O.S.)

We

Leaves RUSTLE.
EXT. PASTURE - NIGHT
BENJY, 4, stares upwards, his big brown eyes are enchanted
by something. His curly blond hair frames his face.
Caddy.

CHILD'S VOICE (O.S.)

2
BENJY'S POV-The moon illuminates a large LIVE OAK TREE covered in spanish
moss. The branches and the moss sway in the short gusts of
wind.
CADDY, 7, ENTERS BENJY'S POV, a beautiful little girl in a
white dress, smiling, one of her front teeth missing. Her
big green eyes peer down at Benjy. Her long brown hair is a
wild mess.
CADDY
Benjy, give Caddy a hug.
She reaches out her hands and we see Benjy's small hands
extend toward her. Caddy leans in and hugs Benjy. Behind
Caddy, her hair fluttering in the wind, we see-The large LIVE OAK TREE.
CHILD'S VOICE (O.S.)
Caddy.
Caddy steps back and turns.

What?

(yells)

CADDY

Benjy reaches for Caddy as she pulls away from him.
We see BENJY'S FACE-He looks distressed.
and we see--

He turns and follows Caddy's attention

A pudgy little boy, JASON, 5, further downstream in the creek.
His brown hair gets in the way of his blue eyes. He walks
in circles and lightly splashes the water. He is solemn,
his hands in his pockets.
Come look.

JASON
Caddy ignores him and splashes further in the creek. He
continues walking back and forth in the water by himself.
We hear someone WHISTLE a quiet song.
QUENTIN, 8, watches Caddy from the creek's bank. He sits on
a rock, formally dressed, his hands folded on his lap. His
short brown hair neatly frames his wan face and green eyes.
Caddy picks up a handful of mud and rolls it into a ball.
She walks over to Quentin.

3
Here.

CADDY
Her muddy hand reaches for his clean hand. He reluctantly
puts his hand out and Caddy slaps the mud on his palm.
Mud pie.

CADDY (CONT'D)
Quentin forces a smile.
to the other side.

Caddy hops in the creek and walks

Benjy still sits on the bank. He wears overalls and sucks on
his right hand. Even at his young age, it is apparent that
he is mentally handicapped. His physical movements are
discordant and abrupt.
VERSH, 8,
down next
rolled up
blades of

a skinny Black boy, approaches the creek and sits
to Benjy. He is the WHISTLER. He wears pants
to his knees, puts his feet in the water. He picks
grass and tosses them aside.

Caddy leans over Benjy and kisses his head.
BENJY'S POV-Caddy smiles down at him, touching his face.
CADDY (CONT'D)
Say Caddy, Benjy.
Benjy smiles and reaches up to hold her hair.
Caddy walks back into the creek and squats down. Her dress
dips in the water. She retrieves another handful of mud.
Versh looks at Caddy's wet dress.
VERSH
Your momma gonna give you a whippin'
for getting your dress wet.
Caddy rubs the mud between her hands, not phased.
CADDY
She's not gonna do any such thing.
Quentin walks to the other side of the stream and sits down
on the bank next to Benjy. Caddy picks up more mud and rubs
it in her hands.
Quentin stands and slowly walks into the water until it
reaches his ankles.
Caddy lets the mud slide off her hands and plop into the
creek. She rinses her hands and wipes them on her dress.

4
VERSH
You know she whip you when you get
your dress wet.
He keeps whistling.
Caddy stands up and looks down at her wet dress, clinging to
her skinny frame.
CADDY
I'll take it off. Then it'll dry.
You won't.
I will.

QUENTIN
CADDY
Quentin takes a few steps deeper into the water.
QUENTIN
You better not.
Caddy walks over to Versh and turns her back to him.
crosses her arms.

She

CADDY
Unbutton it, Versh.
Quentin crosses the creek.
QUENTIN
Don't you do it, Versh. Caddy you
keep your dress on or I'll whip ya
myself.
Versh looks back and forth between Caddy and Quentin.
CADDY
You unbutton it, Versh. Or I'll
tell Dilsey what you did yesterday.
Versh sighs. He stands up and unbuttons Caddy's dress.
Caddy takes her dress off and throws it on the bank. She is
now only in her bodice and drawers.
Quentin walks over to Caddy and SLAPS her.
flinch. She stares at Quentin.

She doesn't

QUENTIN
Do you want to get us all into
trouble?
She stares at him, her wet under garments cling to her skin.

5
I want to-

CADDY
She splashes water on Quentin.
Help you.

His shirt is drenched.

CADDY (CONT'D)
Caddy laughs. Quentin jumps in the creek and starts splashing
Caddy. They laugh and squeal.
In the background Jason watches the Children playing.
walks upstream, approaches them and gets splashed on.

Jason

JASON
I'm gonna tell mammy on you all.
Caddy and Quentin stop. They look at Jason, then look at
each other and smile. They splash Jason. Jason runs behind
a bush.
JASON (CONT'D)
Quit or I'll tell mammy on you!
Quentin runs out of the creek and follows Jason.
QUENTIN
No you won't.
Benjy gets splashed on. He whimpers. Versh picks up Benjy
and walks away from the creek. Jason runs around a tree in
the pasture. Quentin stops and gives up. He walks back to
the creek.
Caddy gets out of the water and runs up to Benjy.
his face and kisses his cheek. Benjy smiles.

She wipes

She turns and searches the pasture.
CADDY
(yelling)
If you don't tell, you can come back,
Jason!
Jason peeks from around the tree.

He walks back to the creek.

Jason sits down on the bank next to Benjy and Versh.
Benjy starts whimpering. Caddy walks over to Benjy, sits
down next to him and hugs him. Her wet hair sticks to his
small face. She gets up and walks into the creek.
Caddy sits in the water and when she stands up, her drawers
are muddy.

6
Benjy starts to cry.
muddy underwear.
Hush Benjy.

Quentin and Jason stare at Caddy's
CADDY (CONT'D)

At the sound of Caddy's voice, the brothers all look away.
JASON
I saw tadpoles down over there.
Caddy picks up a hand full of mud.
palms.

She rubs it between her

Quentin lies down on the grass.
Liar.

QUENTIN
Jason glares at Quentin.
CADDY
That's what you always say, and there
have never been any tadpoles anywhere
in here.
DILSEY, 20s, the Children's nanny and Versh's mother, appears
at the top of the hill behind the creek. She is a round
woman and wears an apron over her faded blue dress.
DILSEY
(yelling)
Come to supper!
Versh stands.

Caddy turns.

CADDY
(yelling)
It's not supper time yet!
DILSEY
(yelling)
Oh yes its! Bring them on, Versh.
Caddy picks up her dress. In the background Dilsey walks
away, down the other side of the hill and disappears.
Caddy pulls her dress on over her head and walks over to
Versh. He turns her around and buttons it for her.
VERSH
They won't know you got wet. It
don't show on you. Less Jason tells.

7
Jason looks up at Versh.
pats down her hair.

Caddy smooths out her dress and

CADDY
Are you going to tell, Jason?
Jason looks at Caddy. Caddy crosses her arms and raises her
eyebrows, testing him. Jason looks down at the ground.
Quentin stands up, picks up Benjy and gives him to Versh.
QUENTIN
He won't tell. Will you, Jason.
CADDY
I bet he does tell.
Caddy stares at Jason.

Versh keeps WHISTLING.

QUENTIN
You won't tell, Jason. Remember
that bow and arrow I made you?
Jason stands up and starts walking up the hill.
JASON
It's broke now.
CADDY
Let him tell. I don't give a cuss.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - NIGHT
The five Children walk over the hill.
is only slightly heard.

The sound of the creek

We see the same white southern colonial MANSION. All the
windows in the house glow with yellow light and illuminate
the wrap-around porch. The land is expansive and the closest
neighbor is miles away. The land is green and lush with
trees.
There are carriages parked on the road leading up to the
house with horses harnessed to them.
VERSH
They got company tonight.
Jason shoves his hands in his pockets.
I'm hungry.

JASON
Caddy runs toward a large pear tree next to the side of the
house. The tree is so close to the house that its branches

8
scrape against the walls and windows.
her.

The children follow

QUENTIN
Then go inside.
Jason sighs.

He follows them.

JASON
We should mind Dilsey.
They all ignore him.
Caddy tries to climb up the tree. She claws at the bark, to
no avail. Versh walks over to her.
VERSH
You better get away from there. Mr.
Jason said if you break another branch
he whip you.
Caddy jumps up and down trying to reach the lowest branch.
CADDY
Help me up, Versh.
Versh shakes his head and sets Benjy down on the grass.
helps Caddy up the tree.
Alright.
whipped.

He

VERSH
You the one going to get
I ain't.

As Caddy climbs up the tree, Quentin, Jason and Benjy look
up at her and see-Her MUDDY UNDERWEAR.
Drops of muddy water DRIP from her clothes on their faces.
Jason rubs his face with his sleeve.
Benjy starts to cry as Caddy disappears down the branch,
into the leaves. The tree branches RUSTLE.
JASON
I'm gonna tell.
Versh picks up Benjy and he stops crying.
still look up at Caddy.
VERSH
What do you see?
Hush.

CADDY

Quentin and Jason

9
Caddy drags her body down the branch until she reaches the
end. She sits up, her feet dangle in front of the boys'
faces below. She moves a higher branch out of the way. She
squints and SEES -A blurry image through the window. Some PEOPLE sit in chairs,
others stand, around a large open casket in the center of
the room. In it lies a DEAD WOMAN's body.
Caddy frowns.
DILSEY (O.S.)
Whyn't you all go inside and sit
down for supper?
The voice startles Caddy, and the branches shake. A few
leaves flutter to the ground. The boys look around.
Dilsey comes around the corner of the house.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
Where's Caddy?
Quentin and Versh look up at the tree.
Dilsey.

Jason walks over to

JASON
I told her not to climb up that tree.
I'm gonna tell.
Caddy looks down from the tree at Jason.
CADDY
(whispering)
Weasel.
Dilsey frowns. She walks over to the tree and looks up at
Caddy in the branches.
You, Satan.

DILSEY
Come down from there.

Dilsey shakes a branch and Caddy starts climbing down.
smacks Versh on his head.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
Ain't you got any better sense than
to let them come around here?
Versh winces and rubs his head with one hand.
Dilsey reaches up into the tree and pulls Caddy down.

Dilsey

10
VERSH
(whispering)
What'd you see?
Caddy smooths out her dress.
her hair.

Quentin pulls a leaf out of

CADDY
They're not doing anything in there.
Just sitting in chairs and looking.
Dilsey shoves them all in the direction of the house.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
MR. COMPSON, 40, exits from the kitchen. His thick hair is
brushed back. He wears all black. The sleeves of his shirt
are rolled up to his elbows. He struggles to steady his
hand and light a match. He tosses the burnt matches over
the porch.
The Children and Dilsey approach the porch.
Jason runs up to his father.
Papa.

JASON
Mr. Compson finally lights a match. Jason runs up to him
and shakes his arm, which puts out the match. Mr. Compson
glares at Jason.
JASON (CONT'D)
Caddy and Quentin threw water on us
all 'n Caddy climbed the tree.
Caddy stops and stares at Jason. Her hands tighten into
fists. Quentin waits for their father's reaction.
Mr. Compson tosses the burnt match over the porch. He puts
the pipe in his pocket and takes out a silver flask. He
takes a swig and looks back toward the kitchen.
MR. COMPSON
You all eat supper in the kitchen
tonight. Quietly.
The children all walk into the kitchen through the swinging
screen door. Mr. Compson stops Jason.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Don't be a tattle tale Jason, it's
not gentlemanly.

11
But they-

JASON
Mr. Compson walks past Jason into the kitchen, ignoring him.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - NIGHT
An old southern kitchen. A cast iron stove stands in the
corner, a large ice box on the ground next to it. A sink
protrudes from the wall with pipes under it. In the corner
next to the back door are a set of stairs that go up to the
second floor.
Mr. Compson walks through the kitchen and exits into the
dining room. Jason enters the kitchen, head down. He sits
at the table.
All the Children sit at the table in the kitchen and Dilsey
brings them plates of food.
Quentin looks through out the window and sees-GUESTS exiting the house down the front porch. Mr. Compson
stands next to MRS. COMPSON, 30, who wears a long black
dress and fans herself with a camphor-soaked towel. Her
hair is pulled back tightly in a bun. Mr. Compson shakes
hands with the Guests and Mrs. Compson kisses them on the
cheek. A few of the Guests get in their respective buggies
and drive off.
Quentin turns around and whispers to the Children, pointing
at the window. Quentin picks up Benjy.
QUENTIN
They're going.
The Children all go to the window and press their faces
against it. Quentin brings Benjy close to the window so he
can see.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
The Children's faces are pressed against the window. Mr.
and Mrs. Compson shake and kiss the remaining Guests goodbye.
MRS. COMPSON
(to the Guests)
Thank you for coming.
An OLD MAN hugs Mrs. Compson.
OLD MAN
I'm sorry for your loss.
Mr. and Mrs. Compson nod.

12
Thank you.

MR. COMPSON
The Old Man and the rest of the Guests walk down the front
steps and get in their respective buggies.
The Children watch through the window as the buggies drive
away.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - NIGHT
They all turn back around and take their seats again.
puts Benjy back in his highchair.

Quentin

They all stare at each other.
JASON
What were those people doing here,
Dilsey?
Dilsey ties a napkin around Benjy's neck.
DILSEY
You'll know in the Lord's own time.
JASON
When's the Lord's own time?
Dilsey sits down and starts feeding Benjy. Quentin shakes
his head.
QUENTIN
It's Sunday, don't you know anything?
Hush.

DILSEY
Caddy turns and looks at Dilsey.
CADDY
Dilsey, can I sleep with Benjy
tonight?
Dilsey wipes Benjy's mouth with her apron.
DILSEY
If you can keep quiet this time.
Caddy nods and smiles, she pets Benjy's hair.
her.
I can.

CADDY

Benjy watches

13
EXT. ROAD - AFTERNOON
Benjy holds onto an iron fence and looks through the bars,
smiling.
BENJY'S POV-Caddy and Quentin walk together down the dry dirt road toward
the fence. Further behind them walks Jason, alone, watching
them. They all carry book bags over their shoulders.
I can.

CADDY
QUENTIN
You're a lady Caddy, ladies don't
beat men.
Caddy kicks a pebble on the dirt road.
Quentin shakes his head.
Jason cups his hands around his mouth and shoutsWait for me.

JASON
Caddy and Quentin ignore him.
QUENTIN
I don't care if you can as long as
you don't.
Caddy looks at Quentin.

Jason jogs a few steps then stops.

CADDY
I'll beat whoever I want.
free country, isn't it?

It's a

Jason runs up to them and finally reaches them.
JASON
Wanna know what I got for my spelling
score?
Caddy and Quentin start to walk a little faster, trying to
leave Jason behind.
QUENTIN
You always cheat.
Jason furrows his brow.
Do not.

JASON

14
CADDY
Even when you cheat you still never
do so good.
Caddy laughs and pokes Jason in his side.
hand away.

Jason slaps her

JASON
I don't cheat.
Caddy and Quentin keep walking.
again.

Jason walks, behind them

Versh walks up behind Benjy, they both stand watching from
behind the fence.
JASON (CONT'D)
I don't cheat.
Quentin and Caddy ignore him.
Caddy looks up and sees Benjy, Versh standing next to him.
She smiles.
Hello Benjy.
Caddy?

CADDY
Did you come to meet

Quentin unlatches it, lets Caddy walk through the gate ahead
of him.
Benjy and Versh walk toward them. Caddy runs up to Benjy,
her book satchel swinging behind her, and hugs him.
Jason walks through the gate. He stops when he sees all the
Children together. He watches them. The Children all walk
together toward the house. Jason slowly follows behind them.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE - AFTERNOON
The Children all enter the house. Benjy holds Caddy's hand
and pulls her to the staircase. Quentin and Versh follow
behind.
Jason enters the house, unnoticed.
Benjy picks something up from the first step of the staircase.
It's a stack of paper dolls. He hands a paper doll in a
dress with long brown hair to Caddy.
CADDY
Thank you Benjy.
She hugs him.

Benjy nuzzles his face in her neck and smiles.

15
Jason watches them in the background.
Benjy hands a paper doll with pants and blond hair to Quentin,
who laughs. Benjy claps.
Jason stomps over to them and snatches the paper dolls from
Caddy and Quentin.
JasonHey-

CADDY (CONT'D)
QUENTIN
He tears them up and throws them on the ground, pushes past
them and runs up the stairs.
The Children all stare after Jason, in shock.
INT. JASON'S ROOM - AFTERNOON
Jason runs into his room and slams the door behind him. He
throws his schoolbag on the floor and sits on his bed. He
looks down at his shaking hands. His eyes water.
We hear a KNOCK on his door.
Go away.
The door slowly opens.
He shakes his head.
Get out.

JASON
Versh looks in and stares at Jason.
JASON (CONT'D)
Versh opens the door a little more and lets Benjy through.
Benjy slowly and cautiously walks toward Jason.
JASON (CONT'D)
I said get out.
Benjy reaches one of his hands toward Jason. Jason looks at
his hand and sees Benjy is carrying a small PAPER DOLL with
pants and short brown hair. Jason looks at the Paper Doll.
Then looks at Benjy, who stares at him, offering him the
Paper Doll. Jason takes it. Benjy runs out of the room and
Versh closes the door behind him.
Jason sits on his bed, looking at the Paper Doll in his hands.
CUT TO BLACK.
We hear DEBUSSY playing, then light LAUGHTER.

16
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - EVENING
Mrs. Compson, buoyant and laughing, pours tea in a small tea
cup. She is surrounded by ELEGANT LADIES, a few work on
their embroidery, others sip from tea cups.
A YOUNG LADY stands and walks toward the phonograph and
shuffles through a short stack of records.
YOUNG LADY
I think ragtime is interesting- the
sound is free and lively and it's
becoming popular up north.
An ELDERLY WOMAN, sitting in an armchair, sets her embroidery
down in her lap.
ELDERLY WOMAN
Oh stop that nonsense, you'll embarass
yourself.
They all laugh.
macaroons.

Mrs. Compson nods, picks up a plate of

MRS. COMPSON
(to the Young Lady)
You're too young to know the fine
line between freedom and foolishness.
Mrs. Compson hands around the plate of macaroons.
YOUNG LADY
(to the Elderly Woman)
And you, my dear Aunt, are too old
to hear music at all.
They all laugh. The Elderly Woman grunts, the Young Lady
walks toward her and kisses her cheek.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - EVENING
Caddy and Quentin sit at the top of the stairs, listening to
Mrs. Compson and her guests. Caddy is barefoot and her hair
is a mess. Jason, Versh and Benjy sit on the floor next to
them, leaning against the banister on the other side. Quentin
leans in toward Caddy.
QUENTIN
Can you hear anything they're saying?
Caddy shrugs.
MR. COMPSON (O.S.)
Evesdropping?

17
They all jump and turn to see Mr. Compson standing behind
them. He bends over and picks Caddy up in his arms and starts
to carry her downstairs. The Children follow behind.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - EVENING
Mr. Compson enters the library, Caddy in his arms.
her down on the floor and nudges her.

He sets

MRS. COMPSON
Candace, come here sugar.
Caddy walks toward her mother. Mrs. Compson takes her small
hands and looks at her hair, then at her dirty, bare feet.
Caddy smiles, showing gaps among her teeth, where new teeth
are starting to grow.
Mrs. Compson nudges her.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Go get ready for supper, Candace.
Caddy turns and leaves. One of the Elegant Ladies, Mrs.
Wilkins, watches Caddy leave. She leans toward Mrs. Compson.
MRS. WILKINS
Look at those green eyes.
(Turns to Mrs.
Compson, smiling)
She looks just like you.
Mrs. Compson stares at Caddy.
MRS. COMPSON
I doubt it. She's more Compson, her
and Quentin both are. Jason has
more of my Bascomb.
Mrs. Wilkins shrugs.
MRS. WILKINS
They're all adorable. You must be
very proud.
Mrs. Compson watches Caddy exit the room, then continues
working on her embroidery.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE DINING ROOM - EVENING
Mr. Compson sits at the head of the dining room table and
sips his drink. The table is set for dinner; the place
settings of silver and decorated porcelain are neatly
organized. On the table there is a platter of rice and meat.

18
Next to the table is a large window that looks out onto the
porch. Through the window we see-Mrs. Compson chat with Mrs. Wilkins.
Dilsey enters the dining room with a tray of biscuits. She
sets the tray down in the center of the table next to the
platter of food.
MR. COMPSON
Thank you, Dilsey.
Dilsey nods and exits the room.
Mr. Compson leans toward the window and taps on the glass.
Mrs. Compson and Mrs. Wilkins turn to look at him. Mrs.
Compson nods, kisses Mrs. Wilkins on the cheek and waves.
Mrs. Wilkins descends the front steps. Mrs. Compson enters
the house. We hear the front door close. She enters the
dining room. She stops and looks at the table and counts
the place settings.
Dilsey.

MRS. COMPSON
Mr. Compson sips his drink. Mrs. Compson picks up a plate
at the end of the table and walks to the kitchen, opens the
door. Dilsey approaches her. Mrs. Compson hands her the
plate.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I've told you many times, Benjamin
eats in the kitchen. He's too messy.
Dilsey nods and takes the plate from her. Mrs. Compson closes
the kitchen door. She enters the dining room and sits down
next to Mr. Compson. She picks up her plate and inspects
it. She takes her sleeve and polishes the silver.
Mr. Compson sips his drink and stares at his wife.
Children enter the dining room.
Jason sits next to his mother.

The

Mrs. Compson smiles at him.

Caddy sits next to her father and Quentin sits next to Caddy.
Dilsey enters the dining room and begins serving food onto
the Children's plates.
Mr. Compson stands and walks toward a liquor cabinet in the
corner of the room. He refills his drink.
Dilsey finishes serving the food, picks up the platter and
walks back into the kitchen. Mr. Compson sits down. They
all eat.

19
Through the swinging door we see Benjy standing in the
kitchen, watching his family. He moans. The Children look
up and see him.
Benjy-

QUENTIN
MRS. COMPSON
I've told you a thousand times,
nicknames are vulgar. Benjamin.
Mrs. Compson shakes her head. She looks at Quentin and Caddy,
eating quietly. Caddy's hair is messy and one of her sleeves
is torn, Quentin holds his fork in a fist.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Were you two raised by wolves?
We hear Benjy moan from the kitchen.
toward the kitchen.

Caddy and Quentin look

MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I'm speaking to you.
Caddy and Quentin look up.

Mrs. Compson turns to Mr. Compson.

MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Look at your children. They have no
respect for me.
Mr. Compson ignores her. Caddy and Quentin continue eating,
quietly. Benjy moans again.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Jason, shut the door.
Jason looks up at his mother, then looks at Caddy and Quentin,
both staring back at him. He looks down at his plate. He
slowly gets up, walks to the doorway and closes the sliding
doors.
He walks back to the table and sits down. Mrs. Compson smiles
at Jason. Jason looks at Caddy and Quentin. They both avoid
eyes contact with him. Jason looks down at his plate and
continues eating.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - NIGHT
We hear crickets CHIRPING.
The moon illuminates the expansive pasture outside the Compson
house. There are rolling hills in the distance, trees
everywhere, green grass covers the ground. The lights that
glow from their windows are the only lights for miles, besides
the moon.

20
Dilsey walks out onto the porch and closes the shutters over
the windows, closing up the yellow glow. She looks out at
the pasture and squints. She sees-Quentin laying on the grass with his arms behind his head,
looking at the sky. Benjy sits on his stomach, he holds a
flower in one hand.
She cups her hands over her mouth.
DILSEY
(yells)
Ya'll come inside now.
Benjy looks over to Dilsey, and rolls off Quentin's stomach
and crawls. Quentin stands up and follows him.
Caddy.

QUENTIN
They lean over the edge of a hill and see-Caddy rolling on her side down the grassy hill. She reaches
the bottom, gets up and laughs. She runs up the hill, lays
down on her side again.
QUENTIN (CONT'D)
Come on, we gotta go back.
Caddy looks up at Quentin and smiles. She rolls down the
hill and giggles. She reaches the bottom. She gets up, dizzy.
She sways and holds out her arms, shakes her head.
Come on.

CADDY
Try it.

Quentin stares at the grass and dirt stains on Caddy's knees.
QUENTIN
You can't do anythin' without gettin'
all dirty.
She walks up the hill and trips, she laughs.
at her knees and rubs the dirt off.

She looks down

CADDY
If you ever did anythin' at all you'd
get dirty too.
She walks up the hill. Quentin picks up Benjy and they walk
toward the house. Caddy takes Quentin's hand.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear crickets CHIRP.

Distant LAUGHTER.

21
EXT. WOODS - NIGHT
Caddy, now 17, runs through bushes and trees, giggling. Her
long brown hair falls over her shoulders and her blouse is
half unbuttoned. A YOUNG MAN, 18, follows her.
YOUNG MAN
(whispers)
Caddy.
He wears an undershirt and as he runs he takes his shoes
off, tripping over and throwing them to the side. We don't
see his face.
In the background we see a horse and buggy.
her and they kiss.

He runs up to

CUT TO BLACK
EXT. WOODS - NIGHT
Caddy and the Young Man lie down next to each other in a
clearing in the woods.
Caddy sits up and leans against a tree, her blouse unbuttoned.
She brushes through her hair with her fingers and HUMS a
sad song. She ties her hair up in a bun with a RED RIBBON.
The Young Man, sweaty and shirtless, lies next to her.
She looks at her watch, stands up and buttons her blouse.
Come on.

CADDY
She nudges the Young Man with her foot.
Stay.

YOUNG MAN
Caddy shakes her head.
CADDY
I have to go home.
He grabs her foot and bites it.
balance, leans on a tree.

She laughs and loses her

EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
We hear frogs CROAK and crickets CHIRP.
Jason, now 15, whittles a very detailed frog out of a small
branch. He is broad shouldered and strong. He has a hint
of facial hair. His pants are covered in wood shavings.

22
INT. QUENTIN'S ROOM - NIGHT
Quentin, now 18, sits in a chair by a window. He is handsome
and tall, still as wan and anemic as in his youth. He reads
a book and smokes a cigarette.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
Jason expertly whittles the frog's eyes with precision.
blows shavings off the carving.

He

We hear the clopping of hooves.
Jason looks up and sees-The buggy pull to the side of the road before reaching the
Compson's fence. Caddy jumps out of the buggy.
Jason sets his whittling down and watches her.
INT. QUENTIN'S ROOM - NIGHT
Quentin looks up from his book and sees-Caddy walk toward the house. She turns and waves to the
Young Man as the buggy leaves up the road. Caddy runs down
the road toward the house.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
Jason watches Caddy walk around the house and enter through
the back door.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - NIGHT
The back door opens. Caddy peeks inside. She looks around.
The coast is clear. She opens the door and it CREAKS. She
closes her eyes and grimaces. She pushes the door open
slowly. She tiptoes inside and quietly closes the door behind
her. She walks toward the stairs.
MR. COMPSON (O.S.)
That is the only choice we have.
Caddy stops.

She looks around.

MRS. COMPSON (O.S.)
But Jason, can't we be more discreet?
What will people say?
Caddy peeks around the corner.

Through the doorway we see--

Mr. and Mrs. Compson, now 50 and 40, in the dining room. He
looks older, the wrinkles of the past ten years show on his
face. His hair is now gray. Mrs. Compson sits next to him,

23
fanning herself with a camphor-soaked towel.
stands up, a drink in his hand.

Mr. Compson

Caddy turns back around and hides behind the wall. Through
the doorway we see them in the dining room behind her.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
It will seem we are in need of
charity, selling half our land to
send a boy off to school. And what
about Jason?
Mr. Compson rolls his eyes and downs half of his whiskey.
He walks to the liquor cabinet and pours more in his glass.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I always knew you disdained him. He
carries more of my Bascomb than your
Compson. Are we so low that we don't
deserve an education? Is that it?
Mr. Compson holds up the empty bottle of whiskey. He shakes
it and frowns. He sighs and drinks from his glass.
MR. COMPSON
Yes, you Bascombs are invaluable to
my own sense of racial superiority.
Caddy quietly tiptoes up the stairs.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - NIGHT
Caddy opens the door to her room.
her.

Jason walks up behind

JASON
Where've you been?
CADDY
Leave me alone, Jason.
Caddy walks into her room and Jason follows her and shuts
the door.
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - NIGHT
Caddy sits on her bed and takes off her shoes. Jason walks
up to her and grabs her wrist. Caddy yanks her wrist from
his grasp.
Caddy stands up and walks over to look at herself in the
mirror, wipes the makeup off her face.
Jason walks up behind her.

He crosses his arms.

24
JASON
I know what you do when you go out
late.
Caddy looks away.
Jason.

QUENTIN (O.S.)
Jason and Caddy turn and see Quentin standing in the doorway.
Quentin glares at Jason. Quentin opens the door wide. Jason
looks at Caddy, walks out.
Quentin shuts the door behind him. Caddy looks at Quentin.
He leans against the door and stares at her. She looks away.
She walks toward the window and gazes out. He walks toward
her and sits on her bed.
QUENTIN (CONT'D)
It's not right.
Caddy turns, walks toward him and sits on the bed next to
him.
CADDY
I can take care of myself.
As Quentin looks at her he notices a leaf tangled in her
hair. He pulls it out and looks at the leaf.
EXT. ROAD - AFTERNOON
Mr. Compson sits in a buggy harnessed to two horses, we hear
their hooves CLOPPING on the ground. He holds a whip and
the reins in his gloved hands. The buggy jolts from side to
side from the potholes on the dirt road. Next to him sits
Mrs. Compson, fanning herself. In the back sit Jason and
Quentin.
MRS. COMPSON
I heard from Mrs. Wilkins that Betty
is marrying Mr. Handley's boy. Have
you ever heard of such a pair.
Mrs. Compson looks at her husband. He lightly whips the
horse. She turns around in her seat to look at her sons.
Jason shrugs, Quentin looks off into the distance. She turns
back around and continues fanning herself.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
She should at least have the decency
to marry someone born below Mason
and Dixon.

25
She fixes her hair. She looks at her husband and nudges
him. He glances at her, then looks away. He turns down a
dirt road and approaches the small TOWN OF JEFFERSON.
EXT. TOWN STREETS - AFTERNOON
Fall leaves decorate the trees. The town is small and quaint,
the streets lined with supply shops and horses with buggies.
The Compson's buggy approaches a small CAFE.
Mr. Compson tightens the reins on the horse and pulls over
to the side of the road. Mrs. Compson picks up her parasol
and purse, gathering her dress.
MRS. COMPSON
Well, you all have fun and don't
bother to send for me before supper.
As the horses come to a stop she kisses Mr. Compson on the
cheek. He grins and nods. Mrs. Compson steps off and walks
toward the cafe, where Mrs. Wilkins and another LADY sit at
an outdoor table drinking iced tea. They see Mrs. Compson
approach and they wave. Mrs. Compson waves back.
The three men all watch her. Quentin climbs over the front
bench of the buggy and sits next to his father.
Mr. Compson hands the reins to Quentin. Mr. Compson reaches
into his coat pocket and pulls out a small flask, takes a
sip. Jason looks away from them, toward the landscape.
MR. COMPSON
I have good news for you, Quentin.
Jason turns to look at them. Mr. Compson puts the flask back
in his pocket and takes the reins. Quentin looks at his
father.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
You're going to Harvard.
Quentin raises his eyebrows.
Mr. Compson clears his throat.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I sold some of the pasture today.
estimate that should bequeath
sufficient funds.

I

Jason stares at Quentin. Quentin's gaze falls, too embarrassed
to look back at him.
Jason looks at his father.

26
JASON
What do I get?
Mr. Compson stares ahead.
MR. COMPSON
We need you here. You'll get a job
in town and really make something of
yourself.
Quentin looks at Jason.

Then back at his father.

MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
We need you here, Jason.
Jason shifts in his seat and looks away.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - AFTERNOON
Crickets CHIRP.

Frogs CROAK.

The Compson house is slightly more dilapidated than it used
to be. The paint is chipped, the front steps are beginning
to rot, ivy crawls up the side of the house.
Caddy sits on the steps making a daisy chain. Her hair is
tied up with the red ribbon. Benjy, now 14, his handicap
more obvious with age, picks daisies and brings them to her.
She finishes the daisy chain.
Caddy reaches out to Benjy. He sees her and walks over to
her. She puts the daisy chain on his head. He touches it
and takes it off. He pulls on her red ribbon and takes it
off her hair. She smiles, take the ribbon and ties it on
his wrist. Benjy waves his wrist around, staring at the red
ribbon. Caddy looks at Benjy and laughs.
She stops and rubs her stomach.
watches her.

She closes her eyes.

Caddy covers her mouth. Benjy tugs on Caddy's sleeve.
stands up, leans over the railing and vomits.

Benjy
She

Benjy, shocked, stares at her. He moans and reaches out to
her. Caddy runs in the house. Benjy sits on the ground,
confused. He looks next to him and sees-A small FROG SKELETON in the grass.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - AFTERNOON
Caddy runs into the kitchen. Dilsey cuts up vegetables on
the table. She stops and watches Caddy. Caddy leans over
the sink and vomits again. Dilsey rests her hands on her
hips.

27
DILSEY
That's fine of you, go ahead, make a
mess in my kitchen.
Caddy stops vomiting.

She wipes her mouth.

She stops. She leans over the sink and heaves.
observes Caddy.

Dilsey

Dilsey takes a cloth from the table. She walks over to Caddy,
wets the cloth carefully under the sink, avoiding getting in
Caddy's way. She dabs Caddy's forehead with the wet cloth.
Caddy heaves.
Dilsey feels Caddy's cheek with the back of her hand.
stops and looks at Caddy's stomach, then at her face.
Dilsey stares at Caddy.

She

Caddy looks away.

CADDY
I must've eaten something bad.
Dilsey nods, staring at her.
DILSEY
I don't know from what, you haven't
had much of an apetite lately.
Caddy closes her eyes.
Dilsey watches Caddy.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
Come with me, I got to buy some eggs.
EXT. ROAD - AFTERNOON
Dilsey and Caddy silently walk down a dirt road. They reach
a small farm stand at the side of the road in front of a
large, yellow colonial house. We hear chickens CLUCKING.
Caddy and Dilsey walk toward the farm stand. Caddy holds a
small basket.
DILSEY
Hand me my coin purse.
Caddy observes the lush southern landscape.
somewhere else.

Her mind is

Dilsey sees Caddy is not listening. Dilsey reaches into the
basket and picks up her coin purse. Dilsey takes Caddy's
arm and they walk toward the farm stand. Behind the stand
is a small shed under a large tree and chicken coop right
next to it, CHICKENS peck at the ground and walk around.

28
A black FARM GIRL, 25, sits on a stool by the stand.
wears a hat and an apron.
How many?
Dozen.

She

FARM GIRL
DILSEY
The Farm Girl gets up and walks to the shed.
Dilsey looks at Caddy up and down.
Dilsey?
Hm?

Caddy stares at Dilsey.

CADDY
DILSEY
Caddy looks away.
CADDY
Did it hurt having a baby?
Dilsey's eyes narrow and she inspects Caddy. She looks back
at Roskus, then at the Farm Girl. Dilsey sighs. She puts
her arm around Caddy. Caddy's lips tremble, she looks at
the ground.
The Farm Girl holds a bunch of eggs up in her apron. She
approaches Dilsey, who takes the eggs out of the Farm Girl's
apron and puts them in the basket Caddy holds. Dilsey places
the last egg in the basket, a drop of water falls on the
egg. Dilsey looks up and sees tears on Caddy's face.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear CHATTER, LAUGHTER and JAZZ MUSIC.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - EVENING
Mrs. Compson is entertaining female guests, the same ELEGANT
LADIES, now older. A few sit on chairs, facing each other
in a circle, working on embroidery. Others stand by the new
record player. To the side of the record player is a table
with a tea pot, cups and a tray of macaroons.
Mrs. Compson sits in a chair and chats with the two ladies
that sit next to her.
MRS. WILKINS
But really, Caroline, you must get
Jason to take you to Paris.
Mrs. Compson nods and smiles.

29
ELEGANT LADY
The food is delicious and I could
just get lost all day in those
boutiques.
Mrs. Compson laughs politely.
MRS. COMPSON
I would love nothing more than to
escape for a while.
She sighs.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
This old house has been like a tomb
lately, it's only lively when you
ladies come around.
Mrs. Wiklins and the Elegant Lady laugh and continue their
embroidery. Mrs. Compson looks around the room, watching
all her guests enjoying themselves. She smiles.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - EVENING
Caddy sits at the table, picking off chipping paint. Dilsey
takes out the eggs from the basket and organizes them on an
egg holder. The jazz music plays in the distance, and they
listen to the conversations going on in the library.
MRS. COMPSON (O.S.)
Speaking of Paris, have you tried
the macaroons? It's a new french
recipe the town bakery is trying
out.
The front door SLAMS.
We hear a few of the ladies gasp and murmer.
Caddy and Dilsey look at each other, then walk to the doorway
and see-Jason running up the stairs.
Mrs. Compson appears in the doorway between the library and
the hallway. She sees Jason running up the stairs. She
turns to look into the library.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Don't worry ladies, it's only Jason.
She looks at Caddy and Dilsey as she closes the sliding doors
of the library.

30
Caddy and Dilsey watch Jason reach the top of the stairs, go
to his room then SLAM his door.
Dilsey shakes her head.

Caddy goes to the window and sees--

Quentin and Mr. Compson carrying a large wooden traveling
trunk up the front steps. They set it down on the porch,
then they both sit on the steps.
Caddy exits the kitchen.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - EVENING
Caddy exits the house and stands on the porch.
out across the pasture and sees--

She looks

Mr. Compson and Quentin walking through the land.
She sits on the front steps and watches them.
EXT. PASTURE - EVENING
Mr. Compson and Quentin walk together. Mr. Compson looks
around the land, Quentin walks with his head down, his hands
in his pockets. Mr. Compson takes his flask out from his
coat pocket.
MR. COMPSON
Your mother is thrilled.
He takes a swig and puts the flask back in his pocket.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
And a Compson never disappoints a
lady.
Quentin doesn't respond. He looks up and stares at the vast
pasture, full of trees and green land. They walk along the
fence. Quentin runs his hand along the iron fence.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
The man I sold the land to is going
to turn it in to a golf course.
It's a growing business. Maybe we'll
get some neighbors, too.
He sighs and looks at Quentin.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I want you to have oportunities, and
Harvard will provide them. I know
you won't let us down.
Quentin nods.
shoulder.

Mr. Compson puts his hand on Quentin's

31
They aproach the house and see Caddy sitting on the front
steps. Mr. Compson walks up the steps toward Caddy. He
pets her head and enters the house, shutting the door behind
him. Quentin walks up the steps and sits next to Caddy.
She leans her head against his shoulder.
QUENTIN
I'm going away.
Quentin looks at Caddy.
I know.

She nods.

CADDY
They both sit and stare at the pasture.
INT. JASON'S ROOM - EVENING
Jason leans against the wall, looking out his window.
eyes are red and watery. He sees--

His

Caddy and Quentin sitting next to each other on the steps of
the porch.
Jason's hands are in fists.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear CRICKETS CHIRPING, TRICKLING WATER and someone
HAMMERING.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - MORNING
ROSKUS, 40, Dilsey's husband, hammers a nail into a loose
board on the side of the house. He is tall and serious,
with beads of sweat on his forehead. One strand of ivy climbs
up the wall.
Roskus holds a nail in his mouth. He finishes hammering,
take the nail from his mouth and starts hammering the other
side of the board. When he finishes he looks at the ivy.
He tears the strand of ivy off the house. He steps back to
look at his work, stops when he hears a CRUNCH under his
foot. He looks at the ground and sees-Two small FROG SKELETONS, one broken from having stepped on
it, the other intact.
He slowly kneels down, winces in pain and holds his back.
He picks one up and looks at it. He turns around and looks
at-The white barn, bedraggled and old from lack of use, and
further down the hill, the creek.

32
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - MORNING
Caddy looks at herself in a full-length mirror.
She takes a tube of lipstick from a side table and applies
it to her lips. She sets down the lipstick and picks up a
bottle of perfume, sprays some on her neck. She sets it
down, then looks at herself. She turns to the side and
stares.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - MORNING
Dilsey closes a box of eggs with one hand, and holds two
eggs in the other. She places the box on one of the shelves
in the kitchen. She cracks the eggs in a bowl and whisks
them into the mixture.
Versh, now 18, eats pancakes. The same baby face as in his
youth, but taller. His feet are up on the chair next to him.
Benjy sits next to him, chewing, a napkin tied around his
neck and an empty plate in front of him. In one hand he
holds a flower, Caddy's red ribbon tied around his wrist.
Dilsey pours pancake mix on a skillet.
Roskus enters the kitchen.

He moves slow and winces in pain.

DILSEY
Rheumatism actin' up?
Roskus nods. Dilsey walks over to the table and pulls out a
chair for him. Roskus sits, looks at Versh, nods. Versh
stands and rubs his father's shoulders. Dilsey pours Roskus
a cup of water and hands it to Roskus.
Benjy watches the family.
Roskus smiles at Benjy. He delicately pulls something out
from his pocket. He motions for Versh and Benjy to look. He
sets it on the table. It's a FROG'S SKELETON. Benjy looks
at the skeleton and laughs. Roskus and Versh smile.
ROSKUS
Found a bunch of 'em down by the
creek. I don't know why but they
all gettin' out of the water to die.
He winces in pain and slowly rubs his knees.
VERSH
Ain't no luck on this place.
Benjy picks up the small skeleton and holds it in his hand.
Then sets it back down on the table.

33
Dilsey flips the pancakes.
Caddy walks down the stairs into the kitchen. She sees Benjy
and she smiles. Benjy waves his hands at Caddy. Caddy walks
over and hugs him. Benjy moans.
CADDY
What is it Benjy?
Benjy turns away from Caddy. He pushes her away and whimpers.
He scratches his nose. Caddy watches him.
Dilsey turns around.
DILSEY
You leave him alone Versh.
Versh raises his eyebrows.
VERSH
I only been sittin' here.
Dilsey shakes her head.
DILSEY
He don't just start up for nothin'.
Caddy pets Benjy's hair.
CADDY
What'd Caddy do?
Versh watches Benjy scratch his nose.

Versh sniffs the air.

VERSH
You know he don't like it when you
wear perfume.
Caddy looks at Versh. She blushes.
holds his hand out to Benjy.

Versh stands up and

VERSH (CONT'D)
Come on, Benjy. Let's take a walk.
Benjy whimpers, takes Versh's hand.
door.

Versh leads him out the

Caddy watches them. She takes a towel from the table, wets
it in the sink and scrubs her neck and her wrists. She smells
her wrists, then drapes the towel over a chair. She sits
down and stares at the frog skeleton.
Dilsey continues flipping pancakes. She puts some pancakes
on a plate and sets it down in front of Caddy. Caddy pushes
the plate away from her.

34
Dilsey looks at Caddy, then at the plate of pancakes. She
stares at Caddy. Dilsey picks up the plate and sets it down
in front of Roskus.
Roskus takes Dilsey's hand and pats it lightly.
at each other. Roskus eats the pancakes.

They smile

EXT. TOWN STREETS - AFTERNOON
Dilsey and Benjy stand out front of a store with a sign that
reads: SWEET SHOPPE.
Dilsey doesn't wear her usual apron, and a purple hat covers
her head. Benjy doesn't wear his usual pair of overalls,
but wears slacks and a button down shirt.
Dilsey fixes Benjy's collar and then his hair.
all the PASSERSBY.

He watches

Caddy exits the candy store and gives Benjy a lollipop. He
takes it and smiles. Caddy ruffles his hair and unwraps the
lollipop. Benjy puts it in his mouth. A tall man in a green
suit, HERBERT, 28, approches them from the background. His
posture is very erect and he smiles.
HERBERT
Candace Compson?
Caddy turns and sees Herbert.
hand.
Herbert.
fair.

She smiles.

He holds out his

HERBERT (CONT'D)
We met last year at the

Caddy nods, takes his hand, he kisses it.
CADDY
Right, the stranger from Indiana.
Herbert laughs and nods.
Hello.

He looks at Dilsey and Benjy.

HERBERT
Dilsey smiles and nods. Herbert holds out his hand to Benjy.
Benjy stares at his hand and holds on to Caddy's arm, he
looks away.
CADDY
(whispers)
It's ok Benjy.
Benjy looks at Herbert. Herbert nods and reaches in his
pocket. He pulls out a matchbook.

35
HERBERT
(to Benjy)
Look here.
He strikes a match.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
(to Caddy)
Benjy, is it?
Caddy nods.
Herbert takes the match, the small flame crawls up the wood.
Benjy watches the fire. Herbert lifts the match up and puts
it in his mouth. He opens his mouth and takes the
extinguished match out. Benjy smiles. Herbert smiles.
Benjy laughs and takes the match from Herbert.
Caddy smiles.
Dilsey sees Caddy smiling, staring at Herbert.
her throat.

Dilsey clears

DILSEY
Come on, Roskus is waiting for us.
Dilsey takes Benjy's hand, they turn and walk down the street.
Caddy and Herbert smile at each other. Caddy is about to
turn and leave, but Herbert takes her arm.
HERBERT
I'm no the stranger from Indiana
anymore. I live here now.
Caddy nods.

He lets go of her arm.

HERBERT (CONT'D)
Would you like to go to the theater
or something like that sometime?
With me?
Caddy looks away.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Benjy can come be your chaperone, if
you'd like.
She looks at him and smiles. In the background Dilsey and
Benjy continue walking. Dilsey turns over her shoulder and
calls out.
Caddy.

DILSEY

36
Caddy turns and walks toward Dilsey and Benjy. Herbert
watches her. Caddy turns around and sees him watching her.
She blushes, turns around and takes Benjy's arm.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear the sound of light RAIN and CRICKETS.
EXT. PASTURE - NIGHT
Quentin and Caddy sit close to each other on the bank of the
creek. It rains. They both stare at the rain dropping into
the creek. They sit still. Their wet clothes stick to their
bodies. Caddy's wet hair falls over her shoulders and sticks
to her cheeks. Caddy closes her eyes.
Quentin turns to look at her.
Caddy moves closer to the creek, puts her feet in the water.
QUENTIN
Don't you know whose it is?
She doesn't respond. Quentin looks away.
his head. He rubs his face.

Quentin shakes

QUENTIN (CONT'D)
I'll say it was me, and I'll tell
father and then we'll go away.
Caddy shakes her head.
QUENTIN (CONT'D)
Did you love him Caddy?
Caddy slides off the bank and into the water.
in the water. She looks up to the sky.

She lies down

Quentin moves closer to the water, puts his feet in.
QUENTIN (CONT'D)
Do you love him?
Caddy looks at Quentin. She sits up.
and puts it on her neck.

She takes his hand

CADDY
If I think of him, you can feel my
blood run.
Caddy holds his hand on her neck.
He looks at her.

He takes it away.

37
Caddy lays back down in the creek.
Her hair flows over his feet.

She closes her eyes.

CADDY (CONT'D)
You've never done that have you?
Quentin picks her hair up from off his feet and places it on
her shoulder.
CADDY (CONT'D)
What I have, what I did.
Quentin looks away. Caddy reaches over and grabs his hand.
Caddy sits up and hugs Quentin. Quentin hugs her back. He
takes a knife from his pocket. He nudges Caddy away and
opens the knife.
QUENTIN
It won't take but a second.
can do mine.

Then I

Quentin drops the blade into the creek.
Caddy stands up, walks out of the creek and starts up the
hill. Quentin stands up and follows her. He catches up
with her. He stands in front of her and holds her wrists.
Let me go.

CADDY
Quentin lets go of her hands.
house.

Quentin nudges her toward the

CADDY (CONT'D)
I'll have to marry someone.
Go inside.

QUENTIN
CADDY
I can't have a baby and not be
married, Quentin.
Quentin nods.
Go inside.

QUENTIN
Quentin nudges her toward the house. She walks to the house,
up the back steps and into the kitchen. Quentin watches
her.

38
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - NIGHT
Mr. Compson sits in an armchair and reads a book. He holds
a glass of whiskey in one hand. He reaches over and puffs
on his pipe.
Quentin enters through the main door. Mr. Compson looks up
from his reading. He watches Quentin, and sees that his
clothes are wet.
MR. COMPSON
First Caddy, now you?
Quentin looks down at his wet clothes, and the puddle he's
made on the floor.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Looks like we're all drowning in
something.
He raises his glass and takes a sip.
at his father.

Quentin turns to look

MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Lucky the Compsons are good swimmers.
Quentin walks into the library.
Quentin stands before the fire. Quentin rubs his hands
together. Mr. Compson sips his drink. He stares at the
fire.
QUENTIN
Father, I have committed incest.
Mr. Compson looks at Quentin. He puts his book down on his
lap. He holds the pipe to his mouth and puffs.
Quentin turns around to look at his calm father.
Mr. Compson sets down his pipe and stands up.
to his son, his drink in his hand.

He walks over

MR. COMPSON
Do you realize what you're saying?
He walks away toward his armchair and sits down.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
She's not worth that much despair.
Quentin leans against the fireplace.
his son.

Mr. Compson looks at

39
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I think you'd better go on up to
Cambridge right away, take some time
off before school.
He picks up his pipe and lights it.
Quentin stares at the fire.
CUT TO BLACK
EXT. ROAD - EVENING
A small, green Ford Model T car travels down a gravel road,
swerving and sputtering. It drives through a field spotted
with TREE STUMPS.
The car winds around a corner and turns onto a dirt road.
In the background, a few WORKING MEN CHOP DOWN a large tree
with axes.
The car approaches the Compson house. The Compson pasture,
once filled with large green trees, now only contains a few
trees around the house. The car abruptly stops outside the
front door.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - EVENING
Jason and Mr. Compson sit on the front porch. They wear
coats and smoke their pipes. Mrs. Compson walks out of the
house and sees the car. She gasps and covers her mouth.
Caddy gets out of the driver's seat and waves.
loose, flowing dress.

She wears a

Herbert steps out of the car, carrying a LEATHER CASE under
his arm. He wears a green suit and a gold chain dangles
from his pocket to his vest. He holds a BOUQUET of Lobelias.
Mr. Compson stands and nods.

Jason looks at the car.

Caddy walks toward the house and up the steps. She hugs Mr.
Compson. She kisses Jason and Mrs. Compson on the cheek.
JASON
Where'd you find that piece of
equipment?
Herbert walks up the steps and shakes hands with Mr. Compson
and Jason and kisses Mrs. Compson on the cheek.
CADDY
Isn't it a beauty?
it down for me.

Herbert brought

40
Mrs. Compson swoons and holds onto Mr. Compson's arm. Jason
steps down the porch and walks around the car, observing it.
HERBERT
The new Ford, all the rage, green
like her eyes.
Herbert smiles and taps Caddy's nose.
walk up the steps.

Caddy smiles.

They

MRS. COMPSON
But Candace, your eyes are blue.
Mrs. Compson fans herself and stares at Caddy. Caddy stares
at her mother, shakes her head. Mrs. Compson peers into
Caddy's eyes and squints.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I could have swornJason walks back from observing the car.
Mrs. Compson nervously giggles and fans herself.
abruptly says--

Herbert

HERBERT
We had to keep honking to get the
country folks out of the way, poor
things never seen an auto.
He hands the bouquet to Mrs. Compson. She takes the bouquet
and smells the flowers. Mrs. Compson sneezes and coughs.
MRS. COMPSON
You see? You taking my little girl
away is already affecting my health.
Mrs. Compson dabs at her nose with her handkerchief.
HERBERT
Unless I do what I am tempted to and
take you instead.
Herbert winks at Mrs. Compson and laughs. Herbert takes
Mrs. Compson's hand, she blushes. She takes Mr. Compson's
arm.
MR. COMPSON
Supper will be ready soon.
JASON
(snidely)
We must be quiet though, Quentin is
reading.

41
Mr. Compson leads the family back into the house.
takes Caddy's hand.

Herbert

HERBERT
No one gives a damn anymore whether
you like Flaubert better than Henry
James. The only education anyone
needs now is how to make a fast buck.
Mr. Compson raises his eyebrows.
MR. COMPSON
I suppose you could sell your soul.
Herbert laughs.
HERBERT
I'd a sold it long ago if it were
worth anything.
Mr. Compson grimaces. They all enter the house.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE DINING ROOM - EVENING
Mr. Compson enters the library and walks toward the liquor
cabinet. Herbert enters the room and sets the leather case
down in a corner of the room. Caddy, Mrs. Compson and Jason
enter the room behind him.
MR. COMPSON
What do you drink, Herbert?
Mr. Compson pours himself a drink. In the background, Herbert
shakes his head.
HERBERT
Nothing, thank you, sir. Impaired
physical and mental faculties are
not something I enjoy.
Mr. Compson stares at the wall in front of him, then continues
making his drink. He turns and sits at the head of the table,
Mrs. Compson sits down next to him.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
(points at the flowers)
Let me take care of those.
Herbert takes the flowers from her. Mrs. Compson smiles.
Jason sits next to Mr. Compson, and Caddy next to Mrs.
Compson.
Dilsey brings in a platter of food and sets it on the table.
Herbert turns and looks at Dilsey.

42
HERBERT (CONT'D)
You must be Dilsey.
He hands the bouquet of flowers to her.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Could you put these in a vase for
Mrs. Compson? Do you like Lobelias,
Dilsey?
Herbert turns to look at the family, seated around the dining
table. Dilsey takes the bouquet and stares at Herbert up
and down. Herbert smiles.
MR. COMPSON
Dilsey, call for Quentin, please.
Dilsey nods, staring at Herbert.
at Herbert and smiles.

Mr. Compson turns to look

MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
(to Herbert)
So, Herbert, besides being sober and
illiterate, what is it you do,
exactly?
Caddy and Mrs. Compson stare at Mr. Compson, he shrugs.
MRS. COMPSON
Don't mind him, Herbert.
(to Mr. Compson)
Just because you're drinking youself
into the ground doesn't mean everyone
else should as well.
Caddy gives Herbert an embarassed look. Herbert laughs
politely and points at the Lobelias.
HERBERT
These actually came from one of the
investments I'm working on. A small
flower shop back home in Indiana.
Dilsey slowly backs out of the room.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - EVENING
Dilsey slowly walks up the stairway, still holding the bouquet
and shaking her head. She sniffs the flowers and grimaces.
We can still hear the conversation from the dining room.
HERBERT (O.S.)
I'm an entrepreneur of sorts. I'm
currently investing in a sweet shop
as well.

43
Dilsey reaches the top of the stairs. She walks down the
upstairs hallway, holding on to the balcony railing.
HERBERT (O.S.) (CONT'D)
The man who owns it wants to
popularize a french pastry called an
ice cream cornetINT. QUENTIN'S ROOM - EVENING
The typical books of a college student are scattered on a
desk, papers strewn everywhere with notes jotted down.
Cigarette smoke lingers in the air. Ink leaks from a fountain
pen and forms a black puddle on a stack of papers. We can
still hear the muffled, drowned-out conversationHERBERT (O.S.)
A little waffle-like cone you put
ice cream in, and when the ice creams
done with, you eat the cone.
We see Quentin sitting on the floor next to his bed, black
ink stains his hands, smoking a cigarette. He stares blankly
at the floor, listening.
MRS. COMPSON (O.S.)
Oh, how nice.
We hear a KNOCK. Quentin looks up.
Dilsey enters. He looks up at her.
leans against it.

The door opens and
She shuts the door and

DILSEY
They callin' for you.
Quentin nods.

He puts out his cigarette.

QUENTIN
What's he like?
Dilsey smirks.

She tosses the Lobelias on Quentin's desk.

DILSEY
Go see for yourself.
Dilsey walks out of the room. Quentin stands, walks toward
his desk, picks up the Lobelias and drops them in his
wastebasket as he exits his room.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE DINING ROOM - EVENING
Quentin walks into the dining room. He sees Caddy. Caddy
doesn't look at him. Herbert stands at the front of the
room. He turns around and sees Quentin.

44
JASON
Finally, the scholar arrives.
Quentin gives Jason a look. Herbert holds his hand out to
Quentin.
HERBERT
You must be Quentin.
Herbert points at Quentin and looks at the rest of the family.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
I call him Quentin at once you see,
I've been hearing so much about him
from Candace.
They shake hands. Quentin sits down in the empty chair next
to Jason. Mrs. Compson passes around a plate of CANDIED
YAMS.
Herbert lifts his finger in the air.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Speaking of hearing.
He walks over to the corner of the room, picks up the leather
case and puts it on the table.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
This is another deal I've been
investing in.
He unlatches the case and opens it, revealing a wall-mount
TELEPHONE with a separate earpiece and mouthpiece. He takes
out the telephone and shows it to the family.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
It's the new home telephone.
Mr. Compson stares at the telephone.
MR. COMPSON
What, in god's name, do we want with
that?
Herbert laughs. Mrs. Compson smiles. Herbert puts the
telephone back in the case and sets it on the floor.
MRS. COMPSON
I think it's lovely. Thank you,
Herbert.
Herbert winks and smiles. Mrs. Compson giggles. Herbert
sits down next to Caddy. The CANDIED YAMS reach Caddy and
she serves a large amount on her plate.

45
Herbert closely watches the amount of food she serves herself.
He leans toward her.
HERBERT
(whispers)
Slow down or I'll have to roll you
out of here.
Herbert looks at Quentin and nods. Quentin forces a smile.
They all start picking at their plates.
MR. COMPSON
We have no use for it, but thank
you, I suppose.
HERBERT
Well, out here it may not even work.
You need poles and wires for that
kind of thing and I haven't seen
anything but trees.
Herbert takes the candied yams from Caddy and serves himself.
Mr. Compson watches Herbert. He sips his drink.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Where's ol' Benjy?
Mrs. Compson clears her throat.
in front of her.

She reaches for the pitcher

MRS. COMPSON
More lemonade?
Herbert nods, picks up his glass, Mrs. Compson fills it.
Caddy smiles and looks at Herbert. She turns and looks at
Quentin, staring at Herbert, but not smiling.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - NIGHT
Quentin looks through the shelves filled with books, he takes
a book out. In the background, Mr. Compson sits in his
armchair with a drink in hand. He smokes his pipe. Jason
sits next to him and reads a book, also smoking a pipe.
Herbert approaches Quentin.

He pats his shoulder.

HERBERT
I've promised your mother to give
Jason a job at the bank I work at,
but I'd like to give you a hand too.
Quentin smiles and puts the book back. He continues looking
through the books. Herbert leans against the book shelves.

46
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Jason is well off here, but there's
no future in a hole like this for a
young fellow like you.
QUENTIN
Thanks. You'd better stick to Jason
though, he'd suit you better than I
would.
Quentin keeps looking through the books. Herbert smiles.
HERBERT
I liked you as soon as I saw you, I
says he must be a damned good fellow
whoever he is, or Candace wouldn't
be so keen on him.
Quentin stops looking through the books. He turns to look
at Herbert. Herbert takes out a small box of cigars from
his coat pocket. He takes two out, puts one in his mouth
and offers the other to Quentin. Quentin takes the cigar.
Herbert lights Quentin's, then his own.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Let's you and I get together on a
plan of business I got, old sons of
HarvardHe nods.

They both puff on their cigars.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Best place for a young fellow in the
world. I'm going to send my own sons
there.

Quentin puts his cigar down on the corner of the book shelf.
He continues looking through the books.
Herbert points at Quentin's cigar on the bookshelf.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
What would your mother say if she
found a blister on her book shelf.
He ignores Herbert and continues looking through the books.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Listen, when a young man's in school,
all is well, but when he gets out
into the world he's got to hit the
ground running, in terms of businessQuentin ignores Herbert, takes his cigar from the book shelf
and puffs. Quentin exhales smoke and puts the cigar back

47
down on the shelf. Quentin pulls out a book and opens it.
He flips through it. Herbert puffs on his cigar. He comes
closer to Quentin and lowers his voice.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
Listen, don't be a damned fool. I
want to tell you about a little
business over in townQuentin flips through the book.
QUENTIN
Keep your damn money.
Caddy walks in and grabs Herbert's arm. Herbert stops and
looks at her. He smiles and puts his arm around her.
Herbert puffs on his cigar, looks at Quentin and points at
Caddy.
HERBERT
(to Quentin)
Can't stay away from the old man can
she.
He winks at Quentin and smiles.

Caddy looks at Quentin.

CADDY
Go out a minute Herbert, I want to
talk to Quentin.
Herbert chuckles.
HERBERT
Let's all have a gabfest and get
acquainted, I was just telling QuentinCADDY
Go on, Herbert, go out a while.
Herbert stares at Caddy, then nods. He pinches Caddy's side,
she jumps and slaps his hand away. Quentin stares at Herbert.
Caddy looks at Quentin, embarrassed.
HERBERT
Ta-ta, see you in the funny papers.
Caddy watches Herbert walk away. Her expression relaxes.
She nods toward Quentin's lit cigar on the shelf.
CADDY
You'd better take that off.
Herbert walks toward Jason and chats with him in the
background.

48
Quentin puts the book away, picks up his cigar and puffs.
Caddy and Quentin look at each other.
Well.
Well.

CADDY (CONT'D)
QUENTIN
They look at each other. Quentin looks at Caddy's belly.
Caddy crosses her arms in front of her stomach. Quentin
looks at her. She looks away, uncomfortable. Quentin watches
her.
We see Herbert say something and hear Jason and Mrs. Compson
laugh in the background. Mr. Compson, just stares at him.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - NIGHT
Caddy lies awake in bed. She bites her lip. She turns over
and re-adjusts her pillow. She sighs. She stands and walks
toward a full length mirror in the corner of the room.
She takes off her nightgown. She stands in her underwear.
She looks at herself in the mirror, turns to the side. Her
belly is only slightly swollen, but what is unnoticeable to
others is frighteningly obvious to her.
She runs her hand over her stomach. She stands up straight
and sucks in her stomach. She exhales. She puts her
nightgown back on.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - NIGHT
A door creeks open. Caddy peeks out into the hallway. All
the lights are off. She quietly tiptoes out of her room and
down the hallway. She passes by three closed doors and
reaches a fourth. She takes a deep breath. She silently
turns the door knob and opens the door. She enters the room.
INT. GUEST ROOM - NIGHT
Caddy shuts the door behind her. Herbert is asleep in bed.
She walks toward him, still tiptoeing. She gets in bed with
him. He stirs. She whispers in his ear.
Herbert.

CADDY
He turns over. She kisses his cheek. He opens his eyes.
He looks at her and smiles. Herbert sits up in bed and rubs
his eyes. Caddy abruptly kisses him. Caddy gets under the

49
covers and they lie down. Caddy starts to take off Herbert's
shirt. He grabs her hands. He looks at her.
HERBERT
What are you doing?
Caddy smiles and keeps kissing him.
looks at her.

He pulls her off and

HERBERT (CONT'D)
Darling, I'm exhausted.
He rolls over and gives his back to her. Caddy sits up and
stares at the ceiling.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear Benjy CRYING and the sound of HAMMERING.
EXT. PASTURE - DAY
A MAN hammers a large wooden sign into the ground that reads:
COMING ATTRACTION: BULE'S GOLF CLUB.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - DAY
Benjy moans, his expression is confused and pained.
BENJY'S POV-Four WORK MEN, 20s-40s, erect a large iron gate and fencing
a few feet away from the porch. They sweat and mumble orders
to each other while struggling with their work.
Benjy stands in the pasture watching the men erect the new
fence. The Compson's land is HALF the size it used to be:
the gate that used to border their property by the road is
now much closer to the house.
Benjy's face is wet with tears, a strand of saliva hangs
from his mouth. He sits down on the grass. His eyes squeeze
shut and his hands are held tight in a fist on his lap. His
overalls are tattered, one strap is unbuckled and dangles
behind him.
Benjy moans loudly.
The Work Men look up and stare at Benjy. One of them shakes
his head and whistles. Another one slaps him on the back of
his head and hushes him. They continue working.
Versh walks up behind Benjy and tries to calm him down.
Versh takes his hand and gives him a flower.

50
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - DAY
Dilsey and Quentin hug. Through the window behind them we
see the Work Men lifting the new fence, and Versh and Benjy
on the porch.
Quentin wears a new suit. Dilsey looks at him, pats down his
hair. She hands him a folded napkin. Quentin unfolds the
napkin and reveals three biscuits. He smiles at Dilsey.
Mr. Compson walks into the doorway behind them.
MR. COMPSON
We should be on our way. Your
mother's not feeling too well, she's
in bed. But she says she'll write
to you.
Quentin turns and nods.
the house.

Dilsey smiles and watches them exit

EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - DAY
Roskus loads a buggy with Quentin's traveling trunk. He
chews on a twig. He closes the back and walks around. He
pets the horse harnessed to the buggy.
Mr. Compson and Quentin walk down the rotting front steps of
the Compson house toward the buggy. Mr. Compson has one
hand on Quentin's shoulder and the other hand puts his flask
into his coat pocket.
Mr. Compson takes out a gold pocket watch from his inner
coat. He hands it to Quentin. Quentin takes the watch.
MR. COMPSON
I give you the mausoleum of all hope
and desire.
Quentin looks at the watch.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Your grandfather gave it to me, and
when he did he saidHe clears his throat.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I give it to you not that you may
remember time, but that you may forget
it now and then and not spend all
your breath trying to conquer it.
It reveals to man his own folly and
despair, and victory over it is an
illusion of philosophers and fools.

51
Quentin looks at the watch.
The hands tick.

He turns it over and opens it.

MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Or it went something like that.
Mr. Compson looks away and frowns.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Well, nevertheless, have a safe trip.
Mr. Compson nods. He holds out his hand, they shake. Quentin
looks back at the Compson house. It's old Southern glory is
decaying with the chipped paint and wood rot. He looks at
his father.
QUENTIN
I forgot something.
He runs up the steps of the house.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - DAY
Quentin runs up the stairs approaches a door and knocks.
hear BATH WATER RUNNING. No response.
Caddy.

We

QUENTIN
INT. COMPSON HOUSE BATHROOM - DAY
Caddy sits on the floor of the bathroom, fully clothed, her
eyes closed. Water runs in the bathtub behind her. She looks
up. More KNOCKING.
INT. JASON'S ROOM - DAY
Jason sits on his bed whittling a branch.
KNOCKING.

We hear Quentin

QUENTIN (O.S.)
Caddy, I'm leaving now.
Jason stops whittling.

He stares straight ahead of him.

INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - DAY
Quentin leans against the door. He waits a moment longer,
then turns around and descends the stairs.
INT. JASON'S ROOM - DAY
We hear Quentin's fading footsteps.
whittling.

Jason continues

52
INT. COMPSON HOUSE BATHROOM - DAY
Caddy hasn't budged. She folds her legs and rests her head
on her knees. She breathes slowly. She feels the bath water,
then takes off her shoes and socks.
INT. JASON'S ROOM - DAY
Jason stands and walks toward his window.
sees--

He looks out and

Quentin exit the house. He stops in front of Benjy and Versh,
who sit on the porch. Versh stands up. Quentin and Versh
shake hands and hug. Quentin leans over Benjy and kisses
his forehead. Benjy hugs Quentin.
Mr. Compson sits in the buggy, he moves over.
in and sits next to him.

Quentin gets

The Working Men hammer in another part of the iron fence.
Benjy stands up and taps on the buggy.
the road. Versh walks behind him.

He follows it down

EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - DAY
Quentin leans out of the buggy and waves to Benjy. Benjy
stares, walks behind the buggy. He moans and frowns. Quentin
turns and sits facing forward. Benjy stops walking when he
reaches the fence. Versh walks toward Benjy in the
background. Benjy watches the buggy drive away.
The Working
the fence.
without the
the nearing
in vines.

Men mind their business and continue erecting
Behind Benjy, the Compson house looks smaller
sprawling pasture in front of it, suffocated by
fence. An entire side of the house is covered

As the buggy drives further into the distance, Benjy stares
at the STUMPS of the cut trees beyond the fence, in what is
now the golf course. He stares back and forth, overwhelmed
by all the missing trees. The sold land now looks naked
without the trees. Benjy closes his eyes. He rubs his face
and moans. He looks up, frustrated, and stares at the land.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. COMPSON HOUSE MASTER BEDROOM - NIGHT
The bedroom is dark and tomb-like. The curtains are all
closed and only one small lamp illuminates the room.
Mrs. Compson lays in bed with a towel over her eyes, her
hands rest on her stomach, folded over each other, and her

53
legs are laid out in front of her, looking like she rests in
her coffin.
Mr. Compson sits in a chair in the corner of the room, dressed
in pajamas, folding his pants. He stands and sets the pants
down on the chair.
Mrs. Compson's bedside table is crowded with medicine bottles,
while Mr. Compson's bedside table only holds his pipe and
flask.
Mr. Compson gets in bed. He picks up his flask and unscrews
the top. Mrs. Compson lays still.
MR. COMPSON
Feeling ill again?
He sips from his flask and screws the cap back on.
MRS. COMPSON
I'm not so ill that I must kill myself
with whiskey.
He rolls his eyes.
MR. COMPSON
You'll have the doctor and priest in
to see me next.
He reaches over and takes off the towel from Mrs. Compson's
eyes. She snatches the towel back without even opening her
eyes.
MRS. COMPSON
I'm in no mood for your jokes. I
have to attend a banquet tomorrow
and if they see I'm exhausted what
will they say?
He leans over and kisses her forehead.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Leave me alone, Jason.
He stares at her. He shakes his head and sighs.
himself with the blanket and turns off the lamp.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear a church bell CHIME.

He covers

54
EXT. HARVARD DORM - MORNING
Snow on the ground and on the roofs of the dorms. Harvard
STUDENTS walk in the quad clad in winter wear. Ivy clings
to the brick walls. The church bell dies out.
We hear a watch TICKING.
INT. QUENTIN'S HARVARD DORM ROOM - MORNING
A SMALL GOLD POCKET WATCH sits on a bedside table.
curtains flutter, letting in morning light.

The window

Quentin lies in a small dorm room bed. His eyes open.
turns to face the gold watch. He stares at --

He

The SECOND HAND as it makes its way around the clock, LOUDLY
ticking off the seconds.
Quentin closes his eyes.

The door opens, startling him.

VOICE
Mail came today.

(O.S.)

Quentin opens his eyes. His roommate SHREVE, 18, stands in
the doorway, coat in hand. Short and chubby, Shreve's rosy
cheeks hold up his glasses more than his nose does. He tosses
an envelope on the foot of Quentin's bed.
Shreve puts on his coat and adjusts his collar, looks at his
watch.
SHREVE
(stares at his watch)
Bell in two minutes.
(puts watch in coat
pocket)
Cutting class again?
Quentin sits up and rubs his eyes.
QUENTIN
I didn't know it was that late.

SHREVE
You'd better slip your pants on and
run.
He nods and leaves the room, shutting the door behind him.
Quentin stares at the letter.
He hesitates, picks up the envelope and opens it. He takes
out a light purple card that reads: MR. AND MRS. JASON COMPSON

55
CORDIALLY INVITE YOU TO THE MARRIAGE BETWEEN MR. HERBERT
HEAD AND MS. CANDACE COMPSON.
The TICKING of Quentin's watch starts up again.
He stares at the letter, then closes his eyes.
MR. COMPSON (O.S.)
Men invented virginity.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - NIGHT
A vase of PINK ROSES stands on the fireplace mantel. The
flickering orange and yellow glow of fire illuminates the
room.
The TICKING gets louder.
Mr. Compson sits in his armchair, smoking his pipe, drink in
hand.
MR. COMPSON
In the south, boys and men are ashamed
of being a virgin, they lie about
it.
He puffs on his pipe, exhales smoke and looks up to see-Quentin staring at the roses above the fire, his clothes
dripping wet.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
It means less to women.
The fire casts quick shadows of light around Quentin's face.
He stares, mezmermized at the flowers.
QUENTIN
But to believe it doesn't matterMr. Compson looks at his drink and shakes it lightly, making
the ice cubes CLINK around against the glass.
MR. COMPSON
That's what's so sad about anything.
We hear the FLUTTERING of wings and a bird SQUAK.
INT. QUENTIN'S HARVARD DORM ROOM - MORNING
Quentin opens his eyes, turns to look at the window.
A sparrow lands on the windowsill. It cocks its head and
looks at Quentin. It looks around the dorm room. Its throat
pumps in unison with the TICKING. Quentin watches it.

56
A church bell CHIMES and reverberates through the quad.
sparrow abruptly flicks its wings out and flies away.

The

Quentin gets out of bed and moves the curtains aside to reveal -The college campus. STUDENTS bustle about the quad, some
run, some walk leisurely.
Quentin turns to look at his watch.
Quentin closes his eyes and rubs his face. The TICKING grows
louder. With each movement of the hand the SOUND gets LOUDER
until they SOUND LIKE GUNFIRE.
Quentin picks up his pocket watch and taps the crystal face
against the corner of the bedside table. The glass shatters
and he catches the pieces in his hand.
The hands of the broken watch still tick.
Quentin looks at the glass in his hand. Blood trickles down
his thumb. He puts the pieces of glass into an ashtray on
his bureau. He twists the small gold hands off the watch
and puts them in the ashtray.
The dials behind the watch mechanically CLICK.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. BEDROOM - NIGHT
A FRAMED PICTURE of Caddy and Herbert on their wedding day
sits on the mantel above a large fireplace. Caddy wears her
wedding gown and Herbert wears a tux, neither of them is
smiling.
The room is elegantly decorated, filled with wilting, weekold flowers and cards.
Herbert sits up in bed reading. He puts down his book, picks
up his watch from his bedside table. He looks up.
Candace?

HERBERT
INT. CLOSET - NIGHT
Caddy sits in her underwear on an ottoman in front of a vanity
stand. She is surrounded by trunks overflowing with clothes.
On the vanity are jewelry boxes and makeup. Herbert's tux
hangs on the wall behind her next to a full length mirror.
She holds her face in between her knees and rubs the back of
her neck. She vomits into a small wastebasket in between

57
her knees. She lifts her head, her eyes are closed. She
exhales. She rubs her stomach. She opens her eyes.
Coming.

CADDY
She stands slowly, leaning against the wall. Her belly is
more obvious now. Caddy pulls her nightgown on over her
head and exits the closet into the bedroom.
INT. BEDROOM - NIGHT
Caddy and Herbert are in bed, kissing. Herbert takes off
his shirt. He kisses Caddy on her neck.
Caddy grimaces.

She breathes deeply.

She gags.

Herbert takes off Caddy's nightgown. He smiles at Caddy.
Caddy weakly smiles back. They kiss.
Caddy suddenly pushes Herbert off her and jumps out of bed.
She runs toward a vase of wilting flowers, dumps the flowers
on the floor and vomits into the vase.
Herbert sits up in bed, confused.
over to Caddy.
Candace?

He stands up and walks

HERBERT
She leans over the vase, heaving. When she bends over, her
bump is emphasized.
As Herbert walks over, he notices the
bump. He stops and watches her. Caddy rubs her belly.
Caddy coughs. Herbert stares at her belly.
her and grabs her arm.

He walks toward

Caddy looks up. She wipes her mouth. She sees Herbert
staring at her belly. She looks down at her belly. She
looks up, Herbert stares at her. He reaches toward her
stomach. She pulls away from him. She runs over to the bed
and puts her nightgown on. Herbert stares at her, confused,
and sees the fear in her expression. He realizes.
Are you-

HERBERT (CONT'D)
Caddy shakes her head, fear in her eyes.
It's yours.

CADDY
He closes his eyes, breathes deeply, shakes his head.

58
HERBERT
That's not possible.
Caddy shakes all over and tries to stand up.
I swear it.

CADDY
HERBERT
Don't lie to me.
Caddy covers her face with her hands.
Whose is it?

HERBERT (CONT'D)
Caddy's eyes tear up. She runs her fingers through her hair.
She closes her eyes. Herbert grabs a fistful of her long
brown hair and forces her to look at him.
HERBERT (CONT'D)
How long have you known?
Caddy sobs, she squeezes her eyes shut.
his face.
Please.

She reaches to touch

CADDY
Herbert lets go of her hair and slaps her hands away from
him.
HERBERT
Is this why you wanted to marry me?
Caddy shakes her head and cries.
I love you.
Herbert laughs.

CADDY
Caddy stares at Herbert, scared.

HERBERT
I was willing to let your idiot
brother live with us, and to take
care of both of you.
Herbert rubs his face.
the ceiling.

He stares at Caddy, then looks up at

HERBERT (CONT'D)
And you were going to let me think
that this bastard was my own son my
whole life?

59
Caddy shakes her head and cries. Herbert walks toward Caddy
and slaps her across the face. She cries out. He grabs her
hair and brings her to her feet. She slaps his face and cries.
He lets go of her and she runs out of the room.
EXT. HOUSE - NIGHT
Caddy exits the house. Everything is dark and quiet, the
moon only illuminates her white nightgown and her figure
running through a field.
She reaches a cluster of trees before a thick forest, stops
and looks back at the house. She breathes heavily, tries to
catch her breath.
She sits down next to a large oak tree and holds her belly
with her hands. She brings her legs up close to her chest
and leans her head against her knees. She cries.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - MORNING
Jason walks down the stairs, in a brand new suit, his hair
combed back. He looks very put together. Mrs. Compson stands
at the bottom of the staircase.
MRS. COMPSON
My handsome boy, you look just like
my father.
Jason nods. He reaches the bottom of the steps. Mrs. Compson
kisses Jason's cheek and smiles at him. Jason hugs his
mother.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
You are my pride and joy, Jason.
You will be the best banker Jefferson
has ever seen.
Jason fusses with his suit.
JASON
I don't think Quentin's suit fits me
too well.
Mr. Compson steps into the hallway from the library.
looks at Jason and smiles.

He

MR. COMPSON
Fiddlesticks. You look better in it
than he did.
Mr. Compson nods. He extends his hand toward Jason and they
shake. The phone rings in the library. Mr. Compson pats

60
Mrs. Compson on the shoulder. Mr. Compson exits the hallway
and walks into the library. He picks up the phone in the
background.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
(into telephone)
Compson.
Here Jason.

MRS. COMPSON
Mrs. Compson reaches into her dress pocket and takes out a
roll of bills. She takes his hand and puts it in his palm
and closes his hand.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I saved this for you. You take
Herbert out to lunch today and thank
him for helping you. You needn't
say it's your mother's money.
Jason smiles.
Mr. Compson sets the receiver down on the shelf.
MR. COMPSON
Jason, it's for you.
Jason looks up and nods.

He walks into the library.

INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - MORNING
Jason picks up the receiver.
looks at Jason.

Mr. Compson steps back and

JASON
(into telephone)
This is Jason.
Jason frowns.
JASON (CONT'D)
Oh. Well alright, Herbert, should I
come in this time tomorrow then?
Jason stares blankly.

He frowns.

JASON (CONT'D)
But, you said IJason rubs his forehead.
JASON (CONT'D)
I don't understand.

61
Jason's eyes widen.

He grinds his teeth.

JASON (CONT'D)
Listen here, you stupid son of aMr. Compson walks toward Jason and puts his hand on Jason's
shoulder. Jason slaps his hand away. Mrs. Compson walks
into the room.
Jason?

MRS. COMPSON
Jason hits the wall with his fist. He slams the receiver
down on the hook. He turns to look at Mr. and Mrs. Compson.
His face turns red.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Jason what on earth-?
Jason tries to calm himself down.
My sister-

JASON
Jason takes in a deep breath.
JASON (CONT'D)
Is a damned whore.
He pushes past his parents, exits the house and slams the
door behind him.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - MORNING
Jason walks down the front steps and to the iron fence.
looks out at--

He

The new GOLF COURSE across the road. White flags protrude
from the green hills spotted with pits of sand.
He regains composure and leans against the fence.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. BAKERY - MORNING
Mrs. Wilkins chats with an ELEGANT LADY in the doorway of
the bakery. They both wear nice outfits and hold baskets
with loaves of bread. Mrs. Wilkins holds a fan and the
Elegant Lady holds a parasole.
MRS. WILKINS
To be honest, I'm not at all
surprised. They let her run around
loose like a dog.

62
Young Man who was in the shack with Caddy kneels on the floor
and arranges loaves of bread on a rack under the store
counter. He wears the usual working garb, sweat-stained shirt,
rolled-up sleeves, an apron and a red vest. He listens to
their conversation.
ELEGANT LADY
Children love structure and they
need it, that's what I always said.
The Young Man stops for a beat. He picks up another loaf of
bread and puts it on the shelf with the others.
MRS. WILKINS
Such a shame the Compson's only
daughter turned out to be damaged
goods.
ELEGANT LADY
A real shame.
Mrs. Wilkins pets the Elegant Lady's hand and hushes her.
MRS. WILKINS
Here she comes.
The two women smile as Mrs. Compson appears at the doorway
of the bakery. She carries a basket and a handkercheif in
her other hand. She smiles at the women and looks at the
bread in their baskets.
MRS. COMPSON
You only bought rolls and buscuits?
How dull. I aways get macaroons
here, they're delicious.
The two women look at each other and then smile at Mrs.
Compson.
MRS. WILKINS
Caroline, I think we'll be going
now.
The Elegant Lady nods.

Mrs. Compson's smile fades.

ELEGANT LADY
We each have things to tend to.
Mrs. Compson nods.
MRS. COMPSON
Well will we meet tomorrow for our
embroidery club?
The two women walk away.

They nod and wave to Mrs. Compson.

63
Of course.

MRS. WILKINS
Nice to see you.

Mrs. Compson watches them walk briskly away from her.
regains composure and enters the bakery.

She

The Young Man sees her and stands. She approaches the him
and sets her basket on the counter.
MRS. COMPSON
A dozen rolls, please.
The Young Man looks at Mrs. Compson.
YOUNG MAN
No macaroons?
Mrs. Compson stares at the Employee. He nods and kneels
under the counter, collecting rolls in his apron. Mrs.
Compson stares at her empty basket.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear a church bell CHIME.
INT. HARVARD DORM ROOM - DAY
Quentin, wearing his Harvard emblemed blazer, enters his
dorm room. His roommate Shreve sits in an armchair, laughing,
and their oafish friend GOWAN, 19, leans against a wall.
GOWAN
I never took her out again, of course,
she was pug-ugly.
Shreve laughs. Gowan lights a cigarette, offers one to Shreve
and Quentin. Shreve takes one, Quentin ignores the offer.
Quentin takes off his jacket and tosses it over a chair.
Gowan shrugs.
GOWAN (CONT'D)
And it ain't like she's lonely for
me either. By now I think nearly
every fella' in town has had a go
with her.
Quentin looks away and shakes his head.
at Shreve while pointing at Quentin.

Gowan laughs, looks

GOWAN (CONT'D)
I'm sure even Quentin could get her
in a corner.

64
Quentin stares at Gowan. Shreve looks back and forth at
Gowan and Quentin, sensing tension. He puts out his
cigarette.
SHREVE
Anyone hungry?
Gowan puffs on his cigarette and holds up his hand.
GOWAN
Wait a sec, I haven't told you about
pug-ugly's friend yet. Boy, one
look at her gams andQuentin looks at Gowan.
QUENTIN
Cut it out, Gowan.
Gowan shoots Quentin a look, then turns to Shreve.
GOWAN
What's his problem?
Shreve shrugs and shakes his head. Gowan puffs on his
cigarette then puts it out on his heel. He leans against
the wall. Gowan looks Quentin up and down.
GOWAN (CONT'D)
You like one of these girls?
get you one of 'em.

I can't

Quentin walks toward Gowan.
Shut up.

QUENTIN
Gowan stares at Quentin.
GOWAN
Why you gettin' steamed up for over
a couple of whores?
Quentin steps toward Gowan and PUNCHES him in the nose, Gowan
lands on the floor. Shreve gets up, kneels down and looks
at Gowan's bloody mouth. Gowan coughs, and spits out blood
onto the floor. He glares at Quentin.
SHREVE
(yelling at Quentin)
What'd'ya do that for?
Quentin takes his Harvard jacket, exits the dorm and slams
the door behind him.

65
EXT. CAMBRIDGE STREETS - DAY
Quentin walks down a sidewalk, wearing a coat and hat.
pass him, and people walk up and down the streets.

Cars

He passes an alley where a line of women's underwear hangs
to dry from a balcony. Quentin notices the underwear and
looks away.
We hear the sound of RUNNING WATER.
He walks across an old brick bridge over the Cambridge banks
of the CHARLES RIVER. Quentin stops. He watches the water
slowly flow down the river.
He walks to the edge of the bridge. He leans over the edge
and sees his shadow cast over the water. He watches the
water flow under the bridge, forming ripples on his shadow.
Cars drive over the bridge and HONK. He ignores everything
around him and watches the water flow under the bridge.
The town noises fade away and we only hear the TICKING and
the RUNNING WATER.
EXT. CAMBRIDGE STREETS - DAY
Quentin approaches a shop with a variety of clocks hanging
in the display window, all marking different times. He opens
the door and enters.
INT. CLOCK SHOP - DAY
All the clocks TICK simultaneously creating a cacophony of
discordant beats, some tick with a thud, others tick quickly
and softly.
A bell RINGS as Quentin enters the shop. The CLERK, 60, in
an apron, enters the shop from the back room. He wears a
glass eye and he is balding.
The Clerk nods at Quentin, who walks toward the counter.
Quentin reaches into his pocket and takes out his broken
watch.
He sets it on the counter in front of the Clerk.
The Clerk picks up the watch and observes it, cocking his
head to the side an using his good eye.
QUENTIN
I broke my watch.
The Clerk looks over his glasses at Quentin.
eyebrows.

He raises his

66
CLERK
I should say you did.
stepped on it.

Must have

The Clerk continues observing the watch, fiddling with the
small dials. He looks up and sees the Harvard emblem sewn
on Quentin's blazer.
CLERK (CONT'D)
Harvard boy, huh?
Quentin looks at the Clerk, then down at his jacket.
looks at the Clerk and shakes his head.

He

QUENTIN
This is my brother's jacket.
The Clerk nods, continues studying the watch.
Quentin looks at all the clocks hanging on the four walls.
The TICKING grows louder. Quentin's eyes dart back and forth
between clocks. The TICKING becomes so discordant and loud
it sounds like POUNDING WHITE NOISE.
CLERK
You can leave it here, it'll be ready
in a few weeks.
Quentin turns to look at the Clerk.
Quentin nods.

The TICKING fades out.

QUENTIN
It's alright, I'll get it fixed when
I go back home.
The Clerk nods.
the shop.

Quentin takes the watch, smiles and exits

We hear the sound of RUNNING WATER.
EXT. CAMBRIDGE STREETS - DAY
Quentin walks on the side of the road. He approaches the old
brick bridge. Cars drive by, PEOPLE walk past him. He walks
to the edge of the bridge, leans over and looks down into
the water. He looks at his shadow, it's in a different place
than before.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - EVENING
Caddy, very pregnant, sits on her bed. She wears a long
skirt and an undershirt lifted over her bare stomach. Benjy
holds his head against her large belly, waiting. Caddy feels

67
her belly and pets Benjy's head.
smiles.

Benjy looks at Caddy and

CADDY
Did you feel it, Benjy?
Benjy puts his head back on her belly.
We see Caddy's stomach move- her baby kicked. Benjy recoils
after feeling the kick and moans. He looks at Caddy's belly,
confused. Benjy stands up and walks away from Caddy. Caddy
reaches her arms out to him.
Benjy.

CADDY (CONT'D)
It's ok.

Benjy shakes his head and walks to the corner of the room.
He moans louder. Caddy becomes slightly frantic.
Don't cry.

CADDY (CONT'D)
It's ok, Benjy.

Benjy doesn't budge. He sees Caddy's frustration and starts
to cry. Caddy moves toward the edge of the bed and slowly
puts her legs on the floor. She stands up and walks toward
Benjy, reaching toward him. Benjy shakes his head. Caddy
stops. She holds her stomach. She looks at Benjy.
Dilsey.

CADDY (CONT'D)
She leans against the wall.
CADDY (CONT'D)
(screams)
Dilsey.
CUT TO BLACK
Caddy SCREAMS.
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - EVENING
Caddy's hair sticks to her sweaty forehead. She lays on her
bed. Dilsey holds her hand, holds a cloth and dabs her
forehead. A MIDWIFE, 50, kneels on the floor holding Caddy's
ankles.
EXT. RIVER - DAY
All is peaceful and quiet. Birds CHIRP, water TRICKLES. The
Charles river is surrounded by brick buildings, roads and
trees. A LUMP surfaces in the water and floats with the
lazy current.

68
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - EVENING
Caddy BREATHES and CRIES. Dilsey kneels on the floor next
to Caddy and grabs her other hand. Dilsey stares at Caddy.
DILSEY
Breathe, breathe.
Caddy nods, tries to breathe.
looks at Caddy.

She screams again.

The Midwife

MIDWIFE
Get another cloth.
Dilsey stands and rushes toward the bureau, on which is a
pile of towels and cloths.
EXT. RIVER - DAY
The sound of BIRDS and WATER. The LUMP floats down the river,
we see it's a BODY.
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - NIGHT
Caddy sits up in bed, her eyes closed, breathing slowly.
Dilsey holds a wet cloth to her forehead and holds her hand.
The Midwife walks toward Caddy, smiling, holding a bundled
BABY. She leans over and hands Caddy the Baby. Caddy holds
the Baby, starts to cry. Dilsey smiles, until she realizes
Caddy's cry is not a cry of joy, but of sadness.
EXT. RIVER - EVENING
The BODY slowly floats, face-down in the water.
UNDERWATER we see-The body belongs to QUENTIN, pale, swollen, lifeless, his
bright green eyes, open and empty.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - NIGHT
Mr. Compson stands in front of the WALL-MOUNTED TELEPHONE
Herbert gave them. He holds the receiver in his hand and
rubs his eyes. He stares at the telephone, then at the
receiver. He stands straight and clears his throat. He hangs
up the receiver. He walks over to a lamp, switches off the
light. He exits the library.

69
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - NIGHT
He closes the sliding doors to the library. Then goes to
the dining room. He closes the sliding doors to the dining
room. He walks to the kitchen, peers in. It's empty. He
exits the house, walks out onto the porch.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
Mr. Compson closes the front door behind him. He sits on a
rocking chair. He leans back, takes out his flask from his
coat pocket, takes a sip. Dilsey walks past the window behind
Mr. Compson and sees him sitting on the porch. She opens
the front door and stands in the doorway.
DILSEY
Caddy's alright.
Mr. Compson nods.
MR. COMPSON
Thank you, Dilsey.
Dilsey observes him. Dilsey is about to say something, but
is cut off by Mr. Compson.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I just received a telephone call.
Dilsey nods.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
About Quentin.
Dilsey nods.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
You may want to wait to tell Caddy
since she's in a fragile state.
Dilsey waits, listens.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
He drowned today.
Dilsey covers her mouth. She closes her eyes. She nods.
Mr. Compson clears his throat. He wipes away a tear from
his cheek.
Suicide.

MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Dilsey nods and watches Mr. Compson.

70
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - NIGHT
Caddy sits down on her bed, with a blank stare. Dilsey sits
next to her. Caddy's eyes tear up. Dilsey hugs her, Caddy
cries and hugs her back. Dilsey holds Caddy, pets her hair,
a tear falls down her cheek.
Dilsey hushes Caddy. Caddy sobs, burries her face in Dilsey's
shoulder. She kisses the top of Caddy's head. Caddy squeezes
her eyes shut and breathes.
DILSEY
He left this muddy world just like
Moses came in, pure and sweet in a
river.
Dilsey takes her apron and dries Caddy's face. Caddy lays
down on Dilsey's lap. Dilsey wipes her own face with her
apron, and continues petting Caddy's hair.
Mrs. Compson walks into the doorway of the room, her face
red and wet from crying. She stares at Caddy.
Dilsey looks up and sees Mrs. Compson.
Candace.

She looks away.

MRS. COMPSON
Caddy looks up, sees her mother's severe expression.
Get out.

MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Caddy stares at Mrs. Compson. Dilsey hugs Caddy closer.
Mrs. Compson stares down at Caddy.
DILSEY
Miss CarolineMrs. Compson doesn't turn to look Dilsey in the face, but
holds her stare on Caddy.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
Think of the baby.
She looks at Dilsey.
MRS. COMPSON
I am. A life on the streets with a
tramp for a mother is no way to bring
an innocent creature into the world.
The child can stay.
Mrs. Compson turns to leave.

She stops.

71
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I want you gone by tomorrow morning.
Mrs. Compson exits the room.
Caddy is in shock. She stares at the empty doorway with an
empty look. Dilsey hugs Caddy and lightly rocks her back
and forth.
CADDY
She's right. I'm poison to this
family, and I'd be poison to my child.
Caddy leans against Dilsey's shoulder, eyes open in a blank
stare. Tears run down Dilsey's cheeks, she looks up at the
ceiling.
DILSEY
I seen the beginning and now I see
the end.
Dilsey pets Caddy's hair. Caddy closes her eyes.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - DAY
Dilsey holds the whimpering Baby, MISS QUENTIN, wrapped in a
blanket. Dilsey rocks the Baby back and forth in her arms.
She lightly hums a sad lullaby song. Dilsey looks at the
Baby and shakes her head.
Dilsey looks out the window and sees-Caddy walking down the front steps of the house. She dabs
her face with a handkerchief. She walks toward her green
Model T car and gets in the driver's seat.
INT. CAR - DAY
Caddy rests her head against the wheel and cries. She
breathes heavily and calms herself. She lifts her head up
and starts the engine. She looks out the car window, sees-Dilsey staring at her through the kitchen window, holding
the baby in her arms.
Caddy looks away and drives down the road.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - DAY
Dilsey watches Caddy drive off. The Baby cries. Dilsey
rocks her back and forth in her arms and hushes her. She
continues humming the sad song.

72
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - NIGHT
Mr. Compson sits in his armchair, drinking out of a flask.
Quentin's TRUNK sits in front of him, with a small gold plaque
on the front that reads: QUENTIN COMPSON. He stares at it
as he drinks. His shirt collar is unbuttoned and his sleeves
are rolled up.
Mrs. Compson cries in a chair in the corner.
MRS. COMPSON
What have I done to have been given
children like these, Benjamin was
punishment enoughMr. Compson leans back against the chair, kicks off his shoes
and closes his eyes. Mrs. Compson holds her face in her
hands. Mr. Compson stands and walks over to the window.
Mrs. Compson looks up.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I never dreamed that my own flesh
and bloodMr. Compson sighs and sips from his flask. He takes off his
socks. Mrs. Compson glares at him. She stands and walks
toward him. She smirks.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
She drags your name in the dirt and
youMr. Compson closes his eyes.
MR. COMPSON
You're feeling ill. You should rest.
She walks back to her armchair and drops into it. He caps
his flask and lets it drop to the floor. He stands up, picks
up Quentin's TRUNK and exits the library.
Mrs. Compson watches him.
Jason.

MRS. COMPSON
INT. COMPSON HOUSE ATTIC - NIGHT
There are boxes stacked up around, old furniture and trunks.
Jason pushes a cradle across the dusty, dark room. Dilsey
moves a box out of the cradle's way.
DILSEY
Who else will raise her if not me?
Ain't I raised every one of y'all?

73
She stops when she sees something in the box-An old picture, wrinkled and yellowed with age, of the Compson
Children, all very young, innocent and smiling.
Dilsey observes the picture, smiles.
JASON
And a damn fine job you made of it,
now shut up and help me push.
Dilsey rolls her eyes at Jason. She takes the picture and
shoves it in her pocket. She stands up and helps him push
the cradle out the door.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - NIGHT
Dilsey and Jason bring the cradle down a few steps into the
hallway of the second floor. They carry the cradle through
the hallway, into Caddy's old room.
We hear STOMPING.
MR. COMPSON (O.S.)
And where else do you expect her to
go?
Mr. Compson stomps up the stairs, struggling with Quentin's
Trunk. Mrs. Compson trails behind him.
I don't-

MRS. COMPSON
They reach the second floor and see-Jason and Dilsey moving the cradle into Caddy's old room.
Mrs. Compson stops and GASPS.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
In there? To be contaminated by
that atmosphere?
Mr. Compson carries Quentin's Trunk, kicks open Quentin's
bedroom door and leaves the Trunk on the floor. He shuts
the door behind him.
Jason And Dilsey carry the cradle into Caddy's room.
INT. CADDY'S ROOM - NIGHT
Mr. Compson enters Caddy's room and shakes the cradle,
checking its stability.

74
MR. COMPSON
Don't be silly.
(to Jason)
Go get the child.
Jason leaves. Mrs. Compson leans in the doorway of Caddy's
room.
MRS. COMPSON
Poor little innocent baby will never
know the suffering it's caused.
Mrs. Compson fans herself with her camphor handkerchief.
Mr. Compson exits the room, brushing past his wife without
looking at her. Dilsey goes to exit the room, but Mrs.
Compson stops her.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Dilsey, I forbid you to ever speak
that name in the child's hearing.
Dilsey stares at Mrs. Compson.
DILSEY
You upset and sick. You get in bed
and I'll fix you something so you
can sleep.
Mrs. Compson grabs Dilsey's arm.
MRS. COMPSON
I would thank god if she could grow
up never to know she had a mother.
Dilsey stares at Mrs. Compson.
out of the doorway.

Dilsey nods and nudges her

DILSEY
Come on, you get in bed.
Mrs. Compson moves out of the doorway and Dilsey steers her
to her room down the hall. Through the doorway we see-Jason walk up the stairs, holding the Baby. We hear Mrs.
Compson and Dilsey's muffled conversation. Jason enters
Caddy's room and sets the Baby down in the cradle. Jason
stares down at it.
JASON
Damn thing cost me my job.
The Baby sleeps peacefully. Jason watches it.
into the crib and touches the Baby's head.
CUT TO BLACK

He reaches

75
We hear a WHACK.

Four.

GOLFER'S VOICE (O.S.)
(yelling)
EXT. PASTURE - AFTERNOON
A golf ball lands in the grass next to a large foot.
reaches over and picks up the ball.

A hand

GOLFER'S VOICE (O.S.)
(yelling)
Caddie.
We see Benjy, 16, holding on to the golf ball, back to where
the story started. He stands on the grassy hill, squinting
into the sun, trying to cover his face with his arm. Tied
to his wrist is Caddy's red ribbon, faded and frayed. He
looks older and very gaunt.
He looks at the golf ball.

He lets it fall to the ground.

Benjy looks up, the sun in his face. He squints and sees
GOLFERS in the distance. He walks further down the pasture.
Benjy looks around. Behind him we see Versh, 20, kneeling
down, searching through the grass. He mutters to himself.
GOLFER'S VOICE (O.S.) (CONT'D)
(yelling)
Caddie.
Benjy moans, starts to cry. Versh looks up at Benjy. He
rolls his eyes. Benjy sits down and cries louder. Versh
stands up and dusts himself off. He walks over to Benjy.
VERSH
Ain't you goin' to help me find that
quarter?
Benjy calms down.
VERSH (CONT'D)
Come on, we looked here.
Versh tugs on Benjy's sleeve. Benjy stops crying and stands
up. Versh grabs his arm and starts walking. Benjy follows.
They walk down the pasture toward the creek.
EXT. CREEK - AFTERNOON
A young Black GIRL, 10, sits on the bank washing clothes in
the water.

76
They reach the water. Benjy sits down on the bank. Versh
rolls up the pants of his overalls and walks in the water.
VERSH
You seen any quarters down here?
The Girl looks up, shakes her head, then looks back down and
keeps washing clothes.
VERSH (CONT'D)
I lost it somewhere. It fell through
this here hole.
Versh digs his hand into his pocket and pokes two fingers
through the hole in his pants. Benjy sits behind him, playing
with a flower.
The Girl rinses a shirt and rubs it against a tin washboard.
Versh walks around in the creek and squats to look through
the water.
GIRL
Where'd you get a quarter?
Versh looks through the water.
VERSH
Got it at the getting place.
Versh sighs and walks out of the water and rolls down his
pants. The Girl looks up and stares at Benjy, who sucks on
his hand.
GIRL
He wouldn't know a quarter if he was
to see it, would he?
Versh shrugs.
GOLFER (O.S.)
(yelling)
Caddie.
Benjy starts moaning.

Versh taps Benjy and tugs on his shirt.

VERSH
Come on Benjy.
Benjy stands and moans.
EXT. PASTURE - AFTERNOON
Versh and Benjy walk up the hill toward the Compson house.
Versh picks up a flower and gives it to Benjy. Benjy keeps
moaning.

77
VERSH
You a grown man, now. They'll send
you to Jackson if you don't quit
bellerin'.
Versh tugs on Benjy's hand and they reach the house. Versh
walks up the steps to the kitchen. He tugs on Benjy's arm.
We hear LAUGHING in the distance.
Benjy stops moaning.

He turns around.

We see--

Two SCHOOLGIRLS giggling and walking down the road in front
of the fence, their schoolbags hang from their shoulders.
One of the Schoolgirls has long brown hair and wears a red
bow in her hair.
Benjy watches them.
Benjy pulls his hand away from Versh.
Versh sees the Schoolgirls.
You, Benjy.

VERSH (CONT'D)
Come back here.

Benjy runs up to the fence and follows behind the Schoolgirls,
watching them. He holds onto the bars of the fence and
presses his face up against it. He watches them skip and
giggle.
Versh runs up behind him.
Benjy moans.

He walks toward gate, watching the Schoolgirls.

The Schoolgirls hear Benjy moaning, they turn and see him
trying to open the gate. They start walking faster.
Versh grabs onto Benjy's sleeve, following behind him.
Benjy tries to unlatch the gate. Versh tries to pull Benjy
away. Benjy opens the gate. Versh jumps on Benjy's back
and tries to stop him from exiting, but Benjy is much bigger
than him.
Benjy tosses Versh on the ground and runs out onto the road.
Versh jumps up and runs after Benjy.
EXT. ROAD - AFTERNOON
Benjy runs after the little Schoolgirls.
and start running.

They see him, scream

Benjy catches up to them and picks up the little girl with
the brown hair and red ribbon, she kicks and struggles,

78
screaming.
behind.

The other Schoolgirl runs away, leaving her friend

In the background we see Versh and Jason run up behind them.
Jason's face is red and sweaty.
VERSH
(screaming)
Benjy.
CUT TO BLACK
INT. QUENTIN'S ROOM - EVENING
Mr. Compson stands in the doorway of Quentin's room, staring
at the untouched Trunk.
He looks at everything as Quentin left it when he was last
there. The piles of paper on his desk have dry ink stains
all over them. An ashtray of cigarette butts is on the floor.
Mr. Compson rubs his face and sighs.
Jason walks up behind him.
JASON
Benjy calmed down.
now.
Mr. Compson nods.

He's in his room

He turns around to look at Jason.

MR. COMPSON
Did you leave the gate unlatched
when you came in?
Jason looks up and scoffs.

He shakes his head.

JASON
Of course not. Don't you know I've
got better sense than to do that?
Do you think I wanted anything like
this to happen?
Jason stops pacing and looks at his father. Mr. Compson
walks over to the side table and fixes himself a drink.
JASON (CONT'D)
If they accuse him of attempted rape,
I reckon they'll want us to send him
to Jackson now, if Mr. Burgess don't
shoot him first.
He looks at Jason. Mr. Compson shakes his head and sighs.
He holds his icy drink to his forehead and closes his eyes.

79
JASON (CONT'D)
You know the only thing we can do so
the town don't run us out is either
send him to Jackson or castrate himMr. Compson raises his hand.
MR. COMPSON
Please, Jason.
Jason watches his father.
Jason.
I know.

Mr. Compson nods and looks at

MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Just, please be quiet.

He shuts Quentin's door.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
I'm not sending my own son away to
one of those places. He's not crazy.
Jason looks at his father.
MR. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Call the doctor tomorrow and set up
the appointment.
Jason nods.

Mr. Compson walks away.

EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
Mr. Compson exits the house and walks down the front steps.
He leans on the porch banister, which creaks under his weight.
We hear the wood from the banister CRACK and splinter. Mr.
Compson kicks the banister. He downs the rest of his drink
and tosses the glass into the bushes next to the porch.
EXT. PASTURE - NIGHT
Mr. Compson walks across the pasture toward the fence. He
trips, but he regains his balance and keeps walking. He
almost reaches the gate, but stumbles and falls to the ground,
face first.
He lifts his head up, breathing heavily. In the grass in
front of him lays the lock from the gate. He picks it up
and holds it. He looks out at the field he sold, the golf
course in front of their house-A few red flags stick out from the ground and further ahead
we see a sand trap.

80
Mr. Compson rolls over and lies on his back. He catches his
breath. He tosses the lock aside, clutches his left arm in
pain. He breathes heavily, suffering, pain surging.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear the CLOPPING of hooves.
EXT. ROAD - AFTERNOON
A succession of buggies drive down the dirt road.
A buggy drives past, PEOPLE dressed in black sit inside.
In the second buggy, driven by Roskus, we see a casket loaded
in the back, decorated with a wreath of flowers.
The third buggy drives past, driven by Versh. In it we see
Benjy and Mrs. Compson, dressed in black, sitting in the
carriage. Dilsey sits next to Mrs. Compson and carries Miss
Quentin, now about a year old, in her lap. Mrs.
sobs and leans on Benjy's shoulder, who moans.

Compson

Following the buggies is a black Abbott-Detroit Model 34 car
driven by Jason, solemn, alone, also dressed in black.
EXT. GRAVEYARD - AFTERNOON
We see Jason staring down at-Two TOMBSTONES, next to each other, surrounded by flowers.
They read: QUENTIN COMPSON 1891-1910 and JASON RICHMOND
LYCURGUS COMPSON III 1846-1912.
Jason turns and sees-Mrs. Compson and Benjy get into their buggy, parked next to
his car. Mrs. Compson still sobs. They sit down. Benjy
holds onto a flower with both hands and stares at his mother,
then at Jason and the tombstones. The buggy jolts forward
as Versh whips the horse.
Jason turns around and looks at the two graves again. He
pulls on his gloves, adjusts his hat, looks up and sees-Someone standing behind a tree a few feet away.
Jason frowns. He walks toward the tree, then around it and
sees it's Caddy.
She lifts up her black veil. She has dark rings under her
eyes and looks much older than her years.

81
CADDY
Hello, Jason.
Caddy holds out her hand.
looks away.

Jason stares at her hand.

He

JASON
Thought you had more sense than to
come back here.
You did?

CADDY
Jason crosses his arms.
CADDY (CONT'D)
I'm sorry about the bank, Jason.
JASON
You needn't have come back, there's
nothing left.
She looks toward the two graves.
CADDY
I just happened to see it in the
paper. On the back page.
Jason nods and looks away.
JASON
We don't even speak your name at the
house, you know that?
Caddy nods.
JASON (CONT'D)
Your little girl ain't supposed to
know your name.
Jason-

CADDY
Caddy looks at Jason and reaches for his hand, but he recoils
slightly and looks away. Caddy looks at the ground.
CADDY (CONT'D)
If you fix it so that I can see her
I'll give you fifty dollars.
Jason scoffs.
JASON
You haven't got fifty dollars.

82
Will you?

CADDY
Just for a minute.

Caddy searches under her cloak and then pulls her hand out.
She shows him a fifty dollar bill.
JASON
What have you been doing to get that?
Caddy avoids making eye contact with him.
CADDY
I'll give you a hundred.
Jason looks away.

Will you?

He sighs.

JASON
You do what I say. Just a minute.
And you get on the first train out
of here tomorrow.
Caddy nods and looks at Jason.
CADDY
Yes. Just like you say, just so I
see her a minute. Then I'll go right
on my way back to Memphis.
JASON
Give me the money.
CADDY
I'll give it to you afterward.
JASON
Don't you trust me?
Caddy looks away and fidgets. She looks at the money in her
hand. She looks at the ground.
CADDY
I'll give it to you afterward.
Jason nods and turns to leave.
Wait.

Caddy grabs his arm.

CADDY (CONT'D)
Jason turns around. Caddy holds out two fifty dollar bills.
Jason looks around the graveyard, takes them. Caddy doesn't
let go of the bills.
You promise?

CADDY (CONT'D)

83
Jason tugs on the money.
Let go.

JASON
Caddy grabs Jason's arm with her free hand.
CADDY
I wouldn't ask you if there was
another way.
Caddy lets go of the money.
his coat pocket.

Jason folds it and puts it inside

JASON
I'll drive into town in about an
hour. You can see her then.
Jason turns and walks away.
watches him walk away.

He walks toward his car, Caddy

INT. COMPSON HOUSE - EVENING
Jason enters the house. He shuts the door behind him. We
hear Benjy moaning in the distance and Mrs. Compson sobbing
loudly. Jason sighs, walks upstairs.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - EVENING
Jason walks up the stairs to the second floor. Jason stops
in the doorway of his mother's room and peers in-The room is dark and austere. The curtains are closed, all
of Mr. Compson's belongings are untouched, his flask and his
pipe sit on his bedside table. His side of the bed is made.
On the other side sits Mrs. Compson, bent over, shaking and
crying.
Jason is about to walk away when she looks up and sees him.
MRS. COMPSON
He left us nothing.
Jason stops, turns and looks on at her from the doorway.
She sits up, her face looks red and raw from crying.
Jason takes in the information.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Everyone has let me down.
Mrs. Compson stands and walks over to Mr. Compson's bedside
table, picks up his flask. She opens it, sniffs it. She
stares at the flask.

84
She laughs sadly and sips the flask.
and drops the flask on the bed.

She wipes her mouth

Jason watches her.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
We should think about sending Benjamin
to the Jackson Asylum. They can
care for him better. It's one less
mouth to feed.
Jason nods, then looks away.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - EVENING
Jason enters the kitchen to find Versh and Benjy sitting at
the table. Miss Quentin sits in a highchair, sucking on a
spoon. Benjy clutches onto the same flowers from the funeral
with both hands. He drools a little.
Jason walks in and looks at Versh.
JASON
Where's Dilsey?
Versh shrugs. Jason nods. He walks over to Miss Quentin and
unstraps her from the highchair. He picks her up and walks
toward the kitchen door.
VERSH
Where you takin' her, Mr. Jason?
Jason ignores Versh and exits the kitchen.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - EVENING
Jason walks down the front steps of the house toward his
parked car.
JASON
(yelling)
Roskus.
Jason looks around. He opens the passenger's door and sets
Miss Quentin down on the seat.
JASON (CONT'D)
You stay put.
Miss Quentin, just a year old, sucks on her hand and sits
obliviously in the seat. Jason closes the door.
He looks around.

85
Jason jogs around the house and sees Roskus and Dilsey sitting
on a neat pile of chopped wood. Dilsey dries a tear, Roskus
has an arm around her.
Roskus.

JASON (CONT'D)
Roskus looks up, pats Dilsey and walks toward Jason. Jason
walks toward the car. He opens the driver's door and gets
in. He starts the car.
Roskus leans into the window, he sees Miss Quentin on the
seat.
ROSKUS
Where you takin' that babe?
JASON
Nevermind that. Get in and hold
her.
Roskus nods.
Roskus opens the door, picks up Miss Quentin and holds her
on his lap. She starts to cry.
Shut her up.

JASON (CONT'D)
Roskus bounces her on his knees, which only makes her cry
more. Jason puts the car into gear and the car jolts forward.
They drive up the road.
EXT. ROAD - NIGHT
Jason's car speeds down the dirt road, kicking up clouds of
dust.
INT. CAR - NIGHT
Jason makes a right onto a road and they arrive at the small
town. They drive down a few blocks. Street lights flank
the road on both sides. Up ahead, we see a figure leaning
against a street lamp post.
Jason observes the figure, and as they approach it, the figure
turns around and we see it's Caddy.
JASON
Lift the child up to the window.
Roskus looks at Jason, and sees him staring up ahead. Roskus
follows his gaze and sees Caddy. Roskus's eyes widen. He
gasps.

86
Ain't that-

ROSKUS
Jason floors the pedal.
Do it.

JASON
Roskus picks up Miss Quentin and lifts her up to the window.
EXT. TOWN STREETS - NIGHT
Caddy sees Jason driving the car. As they approach her,
Jason only speeds up. Caddy breathes hard.
Jason.

CADDY
Caddy holds her hand out.

She shakes her head.

CADDY (CONT'D)
(yelling)
Jason, stop.
Jason speeds up and drives past her.

Caddy sees--

Roskus holding Miss Quentin up to the window.
Caddy runs into the street, trying to catch up with the car,
waving her arms. Jason's car drives on and makes a turn
away from the town.
Caddy stops running. She breathes hard and sobs. She walks
to the sidewalk and sits down on the curb. She holds her
head in her hands.
INT. CAR - NIGHT
Jason continues speeding down the road. He turns around a
corner, and drives onto a gravel road, leaving the town
behind.
Roskus stares at Jason, slowly lowering Miss Quentin from
the window, sets her down on his lap. He glares at him and
shakes his head.
ROSKUS
You's a cold man, Jason.
Jason turns to look at Roskus.
beat, then looks away.

Roskus holds his stare for a

Jason looks at Miss Quentin, who sits, unaware, in Roskus'
lap.

87
CUT TO BLACK
INT. FARM SUPPLY STORE - MORNING
Jason closes the door behind him.
gloves.

He takes off his hat and

The gruff store owner, EARL, 50, stands behind the counter.
He has a long gray beard, his hair slicked back and chews on
a toothpick. He glares at Jason.
Jason takes off his jacket, looks up and sees Earl.
Late again.

EARL
He walks over to the coat rack behind Earl and hangs up his
hat and jacket.
JASON
You know what you can do about it.
Jason goes straight to the back of the store.
INT. FARM SUPPLY STORE BACK ROOM - MORNING
Jason enters the back room, there are two desks, a stack of
empty crates and a table with a stack of mail in the corner.
Jason sits at one of the desks and shuffles through the stack
of mail. He stops on one envelope that reads: JEFFERSON
BANK.
He opens the envelope and looks over the first few lines
that read: LATE FEE NOTICE. Jason drops the letter down on
his desk and rubs his temples.
The back door suddenly opens and Caddy walks in.
shuts the door behind her.
Jason looks up, startled.
Liar.

She quickly

Caddy glares at Jason

CADDY
Caddy approaches Jason, twisting her gloves in her hands.
Jason stands up.
JASON
Are you crazy? What do you mean
coming in here like this?
Caddy walks right up to Jason's face.
CADDY
You're a dirty liar.

88
Jason glares at Caddy.
JASON
You're the one that lied, you were
supposed to be on the first train
out of here.
He takes her hand and leads her to the back door.
struggles to get loose.
Let me go.

She

CADDY
Jason opens the door, revealing the alley behind the store.
Caddy shuts the door and stands in front of it.
If I
town
I'll
Then
your

JASON
see or hear you're still in
after number seventeen runs,
tell mother you were in town.
hold your breath until you see
bastard child again.

She stares at him.
CADDY
Listen, Jason. If you and mother
will let me have her back, I'll give
you a thousand dollars.
Jason laughs.
JASON
Now I know you're lying.
got a thousand dollars.

You haven't

Caddy nods and grabs Jason's arms.
Yes I have.
get it.

CADDY
I will have it, I can

JASON
And I know how, you'll get it the
same way you got her.
Caddy lets go of his arms and stares at him, her eyes tear
up. She walks away from him. Jason crosses his arms. Caddy
looks at Jason.
CADDY
Oh I'm crazy, I can't take her.
can barely take care of myself.
Caddy sighs.

She walks toward Jason.

I

89
CADDY (CONT'D)
I know she'll be better off with
you.
She stares at Jason and touches his hand.
CADDY (CONT'D)
Just promise to take care of her,
she's kin to you. Please, Jason.
You know mama won't speak to me, she
thinks I ruined us, else I'd ask her
first.
Jason observes Caddy.

She looks desperate.

CADDY (CONT'D)
I'll send money if she ever needs
anything, see that she has things
like other girls.
Jason looks away.
CADDY (CONT'D)
I know you need money. Let me help.
I can help you and my baby.
Jason looks at Caddy.
JASON
I don't need your help.
Caddy stares at him.
CADDY
Say what you want, Jason. I want
her to have things like other girls.
I want to help you.
Jason nods.

He opens the door and motions for her to leave.

JASON
You need to leave town.
Caddy nods.
I will.

CADDY
JASON
Number seventeen.
Caddy exists and watches Jason as he shuts the door. He
turns around and leans against the door. He rubs his eyes
and stands still.

90
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - DAY
Mrs. Compson sits in an armchair. She wears a long dark
green dress with a black shawl, her hair pulled up in an
intricate bun. She looks more elegant than usual, but her
face is swollen and sad.
On the table next to her sits a tray of biscuits, a tea pot
and tea cups. She looks at her watch and sighs.
MRS. COMPSON
Dilsey.
She straightens her shawl and smoothes out her dress.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Dilsey.
Dilsey pokes her head out from the kitchen.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Where's Benjy?
DILSEY
He out by the stream, Versh'll keep
him busy.
Mrs. Compson nods.
Dilsey goes back into the kitchen.
Mrs. Compson looks at her watch again.

She sighs.

Mrs. Compson looks around the library. It looks very
organized and clean. Mrs. Compson stands and straightens
out the pillows on the chairs, fixes odds and ends, making
sure everything looks perfect, even though it already does.
She looks at her watch.
The phone RINGS.
the receiver.
Yes?

Mrs. Compson runs toward it and picks up
MRS. COMPSON

She listens.
Oh.
She listens.

MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
What a shame.

91
Alright.
better.

MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Yes next week then. Feel

She hangs up. She bites her lip and crosses her arms. She
fans herself, goes to open a window. Through it she sees-A fancy, black Cadillac LaSalle sputtering down the road.
Mrs. Compson smiles.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
Dilsey, they're arriving. Go help
her out of the car.
Mrs. Compson returns to her armchair, sits and straightens
out her dress and shawl. Dilsey exits the kitchen, then
through the front door. Through the open window we see-Dilsey walking down the front steps, she waves at the car.
Mrs. Compson works on her embroidery. Without moving her
head, she slowly peers out the window. She seesMrs. Wilkins pokes her head out the back seat window. She
hands Dilsey a basket and says something. Dilsey takes the
basket, nods and smiles. Mrs. Wilkins pulls her head back
in the car and waves. The Cadillac turns around and drives
back up the road and disappears.
Mrs. Compson watches the car drive away. Her lip trembles.
Dilsey walks in the library. Mrs. Compson pretends to work
on her embroidery.
DILSEY
Miss Wilkins say she could only bring
by this basket because she forgot
about a dentist appointment. She
say she come next week.
Dilsey lifts up the basket. She sets it down next to the
biscuits. She looks at the tea pot, feels its side.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
Let me take this and heat it up again.
Mrs. Compson nods.
Dilsey takes the tea pot and leaves the library.
Mrs. Compson drops her embroidery in her lap and watches the
Cadillac drive away.
CUT TO BLACK

92
We hear crickets CHIRP and leaves RUSTLE.
Caddy.

CHILD'S VOICE (O.S.)
EXT. PASTURE - NIGHT
We see the LARGE LIVE OAK TREE in front of the Compson house.
The branches move slowly in the breeze and the spanish moss
the grows on the trunk sways.
Benjy sits on the porch of the Compson house. He looks back
and forth between the fence, the tree and the remaining stumps
of the cut trees outside the fence.
Benjy closes his eyes.
BENJY'S POV-The large LIVE OAK outside the Compson house sways. The
Spanish Moss blows in the gust of wind. One of the branches
starts to shake. Suddenly, a small LEG dangles down the
branch, the rest of the body is hidden by the leaves. Then
the rest of the body appears, sitting on the branch. It's
seven-year-old CADDY, wearing the same white, wet, muddied
dress.
Caddy.

CHILD'S VOICE (O.S.)
Caddy looks down from the tree and smiles.
Benjy.
Benjy.

CADDY
VERSH (O.S.)
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
Benjy sits on the front steps of the porch. He stares at
the large Live Oak, Caddy is gone. Benjy groans and winces.
He rubs his face. Versh appears behind him, taps his
shoulder.
Benjy.

VERSH
Benjy turns around and sees Versh. Versh sits down next to
him. Benjy rubs Caddy's faded and frayed red ribbon tied
around his wrist. Benjy tugs at the ribbon. Versh holds
Benjy's arm. Benjy moans.
Benjy, hush.

VERSH (CONT'D)
It's alright.

93
Benjy tugs at the ribbon. Versh reaches into his pocket and
takes out a lollipop. He hands it to Benjy. Benjy shakes
his head and squeezes his eyes shut, tugging at the ribbon.
Versh unwraps the lollipop and puts it in Benjy's hand.
VERSH (CONT'D)
Look Benjy, sweets.
Benjy, frustrated, throws the lollipop on the ground. He
holds his head in his hands. Versh pats his back. Versh
stands up, picks up the lollipop from the ground. He takes
Benjy's arm and tries to pull him up.
VERSH (CONT'D)
Let's go inside Benjy.
Benjy stands.
EXT. ROAD - NIGHT
Caddy watches Benjy and Versh from a distance, behind a tree.
CADDY
(whispering)
Benjy.
Benjy turns around. He looks around the pasture, but Versh
tugs his arm. They go inside the house.
Caddy observes the Compson house-It is visibly deteriorating. Ivy has started to cover most
of the house, and the parts that aren't covered show chipping
paint and loose boards. The front steps rot on one side and
the windows are dirty.
She walks closer to the house, tiptoeing down the road, trying
to cover herself behind trees and bushes.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - NIGHT
She walks to the outside of the kitchen and peers in through
the window. She sees-Versh sitting down at the table. Benjy sits as Dilsey ties
a napkin around his neck. Miss Quentin sits in a highchair,
watching Dilsey.
Caddy smiles. She watches Miss Quentin. Her smile fades
and her eyes tear up. She looks at Benjy and sees-He's STARING right at her.
She stares at him and smiles.

She waves.

94
Benjy abruptly stands up and moans. Dilsey looks up, but
Caddy drops down under the window before she can be seen by
anyone else. She bites her lip. She walks toward the front
porch, staying low under the windows.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - NIGHT
Benjy stands up and walks toward the window.
DILSEY
What's gotten into you?
Benjy peers out the window, pounds on it.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
(yelling)
Benjy.
Benjy yells.

Versh stands up and tries to calm him down.

EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - NIGHT
Caddy takes an envelope from her coat pocket. She picks up
a small rock from the ground. She puts the envelope on the
porch and the rock on top of it. We hear Benjy moan louder.
Caddy looks around and quickly runs down the road, away from
the house.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - NIGHT
Benjy pounds on the window and yells.
Benjy.

VERSH
Versh stands up and tries to pull him away from the window.
Benjy sees-Caddy running down the road. She disappears as she turns
onto the main road.
Benjy pounds the window harder, screaming.
starts to cry.

Miss Quentin

DILSEY
(yelling)
Jason.
He frantically breathes hard, struggling to get Versh off
him. Benjy pushes Versh away and slams him into the wall
behind him. Benjy runs out of the house.
Jason runs into the kitchen, sees Versh on the floor, blood
smeared on his arm. Miss Quentin screeches. Dilsey picks
her up and tries to calm her down.

95
JASON
What the hell is going on?
He ran out.

DILSEY
Jason turns around and runs out the house.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - NIGHT
Benjy runs down the road, screaming. Jason runs after him.
Jason catches up and grabs his arm. Benjy yanks his arm
free and keeps running. Jason tackles Benjy and they drop
to the ground.
Dilsey and Versh run towards them.

Quit.

DILSEY
(yelling)
Benjy turns around and PUNCHES Jason right in the eye, making
him roll over. Benjy tries to get up. Jason shakes his
head, reaches over and grabs Benjy's ankle, bring him down
again. Jason PUNCHES Benjy in the face. Benjy SCREAMS.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
(yelling)
Jason.
Jason punches Benjy over and over again. Versh runs over to
Jason and tries to pull him off of Benjy.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
(yelling)
Jason.
Jason pushes Versh off of him and slams him on the ground.
DILSEY (CONT'D)
(yelling)
You, Jason.
Jason stops. Blood trickles from his nose. Jason looks at
Versh, breathing hard, looking up at him. Jason turns and
looks at Dilsey, scared and out of breath. He turns to look
at Benjy-Benjy chokes on his own blood, on the floor, crying. Blood
rolls out of his mouth and down his nose. His eyes squeezed
shut.
Jason stands.
face.

He spits blood from his mouth and wipes his

96
Dilsey.

JASON
Pack Benjy's things tonight.

Dilsey looks at Jason.

She peers at him.

JASON (CONT'D)
Tell Roskus to take him to the Jackson
asylum tomorrow morning.
Jason turns and walks to the house.
Dilsey kneels over Benjy and pets his hair.
Hush, Benjy.

DILSEY
It's alright.

She takes her apron and wipes the blood off his face. Versh
gets up and crawls over to Benjy. Benjy cries and chokes
again. He tries to sit up. Dilsey holds him down.
Hush, Benjy.

DILSEY (CONT'D)
He looks at Benjy's wounded face, then looks up at his mother.
Dilsey looks at Benjy and shakes her head. A tear rolls
down her face.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - NIGHT
Jason walks up the steps. He is about to walk through the
open door when he notices Caddy's ENVELOPE with the rock on
it. He bends over and picks the envelope up. He opens it
and takes out a letter. He opens the letter, reads it, and
pulls out a check for 200 DOLLARS. He stares at the check.
He looks out at Benjy, Dilsey and Versh. He looks at the
envelope. He shakes his head and walks inside.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE MASTER BEDROOM - NIGHT
Mrs. Compson sits up in bed, with a towel over her eyes.
Her bedside table is crowded with bottles of medicine and a
thermometer. She reaches over to her bedside table, and
without looking picks a bottle up and drinks from it. She
sets the bottle back down. We hear a KNOCK. The door slowly
opens, and Jason walks in, cleaning the blood off his face
with a towel.
She takes the cloth off her eyes and sees Jason.
over to his mother.

Jason walks

He takes out the letter and check from Caddy hands it to his
mother.

97
MRS. COMPSON
What was that racket?
JASON
Benjy gave me trouble.
Mrs. Compson stares at Jason.
MRS. COMPSON
Send him to Jackson.
Jason shakes his head. He waves her off. She sighs. She
picks up another bottle of medicine and drinks from it.
Jason watches her.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
He'll be better off there anyway.
They can care for him, Jason. Better
than we can.
Jason nods.
JASON
I'll set it up tonight.
He sits on the bed. He shows her Caddy's envelope, takes out
the letter and the check.
JASON (CONT'D)
She's leaving tonight. She left
this on the porch.
Mrs. Compson stares at the letter and the check.
the cloth back over her eyes.
Burn it.

She puts

MRS. COMPSON
He takes the cloth off her eyes.
JASON
(lifts up the check)
Two hundred dollars. She says she'll
send one every month.
She looks at the check.
Jason shakes his head.

She looks away and closes her eyes.

JASON (CONT'D)
We need the money.
MRS. COMPSON
Burn it. I won't take a fallen
woman's filthy lucre.

98
JASON
If you won't take it then I will.
MRS. COMPSON
I'll be gone soon, I know I'm just a
burden to you. We all are.
She coughs.
JASON
You've been saying that so long I'm
beginning to believe you.
He stares at his mother. Jason folds the check inside the
letter. He puts it inside his coat pocket. He puts the
cloth over his mother's eyes and stands.
JASON (CONT'D)
We have to raise a child. We all
have to make sacrifices now.
Mrs. Compson re-adjusts herself in the bed and assumes her
coffin-like position.
MRS. COMPSON
Shut the door behind you.
Jason stares at her.

He exits the room and shuts the door.

CUT TO BLACK
INT. FARM SUPPLY STORE - MORNING
Jason stands behind the counter and talks with a CUSTOMER,
40.
JASON
You'd better take that one. How do
you fellas expect to get ahead, trying
to work with cheap equipment?
The Customer looks at Jason.
CUSTOMER
If this one ain't any good why you
got it on sale?
JASON
I didn't say the seventy-five cent
one wasn't any good, it's just not
as good as the dollar fifty one.
The Customer looks at the harness.
inspects it.

He lifts one up and

99
CUSTOMER
How do you know this one ain't as
good, you ever use any one of them?
JASON
I know because they don't ask a dollar
fifty for it.
The Customer looks at Jason.
counter.

He puts them both on the

The Customer slowly pushes forward the dollar fifty harness,
and peers at Jason. He takes out the money and puts it on
the counter.
Good choice.

JASON (CONT'D)
Jason takes the money, the Customer takes the harness and
exits.
In the background we see Earl standing in the doorway,
watching Jason.
Jason counts the money, takes out the dollar, puts it in the
cash register and puts the fifty cents in HIS OWN POCKET.
Jason rubs his temples and winces.
Earl walks in from the back room, carrying a stack of mail.
EARL
That harness cost a dollar, last
time I checked.
Jason waves Earl off.
JASON
You sell everything for less than
it's worth anyway.
Earl shakes his head.
envelope.

He approaches Jason, hands him an

EARL
Another letter from the bank.
Jason looks at the envelope, rubs his forehead.
Jason.
EARL (CONT'D)
Jason, if you need an advance on
your paycheckJason shakes his head.

Looks away.

Earl watches

100
EARL (CONT'D)
I'd be glad to help if you're havin'
problems. I know it ain't easy being
the one in charge.
Jason looks at Earl.
JASON
It's under control.
Earl nods. Jason nods, shuffles through a stack of paperwork
on the counter.
EXT. JEFFERSON BANK - AFTERNOON
Jason walks up the steps to the small town bank.
INT. JEFFERSON BANK - AFTERNOON
Jason enters the bank. He gets in line for a teller. A
TELLER beckons him. Jason walks up to the Teller's window
and puts Caddy's check through the space at the bottom of
the window.
JASON
I'd like to cash this, please.
The Teller nods and counts out two hundred dollars in cash.
JASON (CONT'D)
I don't want a receipt.
The Teller nods and pushes the money through the space.
Jason takes the money and exits. He folds it and puts it in
his pocket.
EXT. JEFFERSON BANK - AFTERNOON
Jason exits the bank, walks down the steps and takes out his
wallet, puts the money and stops when he sees-The small, wrinkled PAPER DOLL that Benjy made for him years
ago.
Jason takes out the Paper Doll. He looks at it. The Paper
Doll looks like Jason. The Paper Doll has a wonky smile
drawn on its face. Jason smiles. He smooths it out. Jason
stares at the Paper Doll, his smile fades.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - AFTERNOON
Crickets CHIRP.

101
Dilsey sits on the steps of the house, Miss Quentin on her
lap and feeds her with a bottle. Dilsey HUMS a mournful
lullaby. Her expression is sad and she looks tired.
Jason drives up in his car.

Dilsey watches him.

JASON
Did Roskus take Benjy already?
Dilsey nods.
JASON (CONT'D)
Is he puttin' him on the train?
Dilsey sighs and nods.
JASON (CONT'D)
How long ago.
Dilsey shrugs.
DILSEY
He should be on it soon.
Jason nods. He gets back in his car and drives off.
confused, watches him drive down the road.

Dilsey,

INT. CAR - AFTERNOON
Jason speeds down the road, leaving dust clouds behind him.
EXT. TRAIN STATION - AFTERNOON
Jason pulls up to the train station. A TRAIN WHISTLE BLOWS.
He sees Roskus getting back in the Compson's buggy. He parks
his car, gets out and runs. Roskus sees him, and watches
him run toward the train.
Jason runs up to the train.
The ENGINEER sees Jason running toward the train and peers
out the small window from the engine car.
ENGINEER
(yelling)
You can't get on without a ticket.
Jason doesn't stop running.
JASON
(yelling)
I don't want to get on.
to get off.

Someone has

Jason jumps up on the platform and into the train.

102
INT. TRAIN - AFTERNOON
Jason runs down the aisles. He looks at all the PASSENGERS,
searching. He goes into the next cart. Runs down the aisle.
He sees-Benjy, sitting next to an ASYLUM
suit, his hair is combed back, a
looks like any normal adult. He
face is bruised and red from the
and smiles.

WORKER, 30. Benjy wears a
suitcase on his lap. He
looks confused and sad, his
fight. Benjy sees Jason

JASON
Come on, Benjy.
He stands up, his suitcase falls to the ground.
Worker grabs Benjy's arm.

The Asylum

JASON (CONT'D)
(to the Asylum Worker)
Let go of him.
The Asylum Worker looks at Jason, then at Benjy.
ASYLUM WORKER
What d'you think you're doin'?
Benjy stands up and walks toward Jason.
JASON
I'm his brother.
Benjy hugs him. Jason pats Benjy, pulls away and picks up
his suitcase. Jason looks at the Asylum Worker.
JASON (CONT'D)
I'm sorry for wasting your time.
ASYLUM WORKER
Now wait just a second.
Jason pulls out his wallet, hand the Asylum Worker a bill.
The Asylum Worker takes the money, confused, stares at it
then looks up and watches Jason take Benjy's arm as they
walk off the train and step off the platform.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - EVENING
Jason's car pulls up in front of the house. Jason stares at
the dilapidated Compson house, dirty and falling apart.
Dilsey exits the Compson house, arms folded.
Jason turns and looks at Benjy, who smiles back at him.
Jason gets out, holding Benjy's suitcase. Benjy gets out.

103
JASON
Go inside, Benjy.
Jason points toward the house and hands Benjy his suitcase.
Benjy walks up the front steps of the house. Dilsey hugs
Benjy. She takes his suitcase and Benjy goes inside.
Jason walks up the front steps, kicks at a loose board.
rolls up his sleeves.
Dilsey stares at Jason and smiles.

He

Jason looks at the house.

JASON (CONT'D)
(to Dilsey)
Tell Roskus to get some white paint.
Dilsey smiles.
JASON (CONT'D)
And a hammer and nails.
Dilsey goes inside.
the wall.
Jason.

Jason rips off some vines crawling up
MRS. COMPSON (O.S.)

Jason looks up, tosses the vines off the porch. Jason
continues ripping vines off the wall. Mrs. Compson exits the
house and stares at him.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
What on earth are you doing?
Jason does not turn to look at his mother. He calmly rips
the vines off and tosses them off the porch.
JASON
Benjy stays with us.
Mrs. Compson folds her arms.
MRS. COMPSON
You're only increasing your burden.
Jason rips more vines off the wall.
JASON
I have to feed every damn mouth in
this house, what's one more?
She holds onto her dress and twists the fabric in her hands.

104
MRS. COMPSON
Jason, think of our name, our duty
to keep up our reputation.
Frustrated, she holds onto his arm. Jason recoils from her
grasp and rips more vines from the wall. He throws them
down on the ground. She stands in front of him, in between
him and the wall of vines. He tries to move her out of his
way but she grabs onto him. He continues ripping the vines
off the wall behind her.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
You should think of us, of you and
me now. We are the only ones left
and we can still save the last bit
of dignity we have.
He is now franticly and angrily ripping vines from the wall.
JASON
Benjy stays, Quentin stays, and god
knows you'll outlive every one of
us.
He stops, looks at her.
JASON (CONT'D)
So please, mother, be quiet. I'm
trying to fix up this hovel and you
are in my way.
Mrs. Compson stares at Jason.
JASON (CONT'D)
Go lay down and rest, it's hot outside
and you must feel ill.
Mrs. Compson stares at Jason. She slowly walks back into
the house. Jason watches her, then picks up the vines on
the floor and tosses them off the side of the porch. He
sits down on a rocking chair and stares out at the pasture.
CUT TO BLACK
We hear the RUMBLE of a car engine and breaks SQUEAK.
EXT. TRAIN STATION - MORNING
Dawn breaks, barely illuminating the land. Not a person in
sight. A car pulls up outside of the Jefferson train station.
The backseat door opens and two small and dainty feet step
out, in a pair of nice brown leather shoes and frilly white
socks. The car door closes and the feet walk away from the
car.

105
INT. TRAIN STATION - MORNING
The train station is empty, only a few PEOPLE sit on a bench,
holding tickets, reading the newspaper.
The same feet enter the train station and walk on the wooden
floor. We see the feet belong to a GIRL, 16, wearing a blue
coat and a white dress, short blond hair and a small suitcase.
The Girl aproaches the ticket booth. She sets down her
suitcase, reaches into her pocket and takes out an envelope.
From the envelope she retrieves a handful of dollar bills.
She puts the money on the counter and slides it toward the
SALESPERSON.
We see the Girl's face and she is the spitting image of Caddy,
except for the difference in hair color and her freckles.
GIRL
One ticket for the five thirty train
to Memphis, please.
The Salesperson nods, takes the money, counts it and hands
her a ticket. He stares at her.
SALESPERSON
Ain't you a little young to be
traveling by yourself?
The Girl takes the ticket, puts it in the envelope with the
rest of her money and pockets the envelope.
GIRL
I got relatives meetin' me there.
The Salesperson nods, smiles.

The Girl smiles back.

SALESPERSON
Boarding in a few minutes.
The Girl nods and walks away.
We hear RUNNING WATER.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE BATHROOM - MORNING
Jason shaves, looking in the mirror, his cheeks and chin
covered in shaving cream. He is now in his mid 40s, looking
much older and mature, now with a moustache.
He carefully draws the razor down his chin, then down his
cheek. He knicks himself and he twitches, mutters to himself.
Bright red blood trickles onto the rest of the foamy white
shaving cream on his cheek. He rinses the razor off in the

106
sink, the white shaving cream and the red blood mix in the
water before going down the drain.
INT. JASON'S ROOM - MORNING
Jason enters his bedroom, drying his face off. A piece of
tissue blotted with blood sticks to the cut on his cheek.
He tosses the towel on his bureau.
The top half of a suit is neatly laid out on his bed, he
already wears the pants. He picks up a shirt, puts it on
and buttons it. He adjusts the collar, picks up the tie and
throws it around his neck. As he ties his tie, he walks
over to his window and pulls open the curtain. He tightens
his tie and puts on his coat. He walks over to his bureau
and opens the top drawer.
In the top drawer are a few of his belongings, including a
small tin red box with a lock on it. He takes out his watch
and puts in on. He picks up a set of keys and puts them in
his coat pocket. He picks up his wallet, opens it and counts
the money inside. He stops when he sees-The lock on the tin red box has been picked.
He drops his wallet in the drawer and picks up the box.
takes off the lock, opens the box. It's empty.

He

Jason stares at the empty box.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE KITCHEN - MORNING
Dilsey, now in her 60s, looking older, but moving with the
same agility and grace as she used to, flips pancakes over
the stove. Benjy sits at the table, eating pancakes,
awkwardly holding a fork in his fist but eating with his
hand. Through the window we see-Versh, now in his late 40s, his sleeves rolled up, feeding a
mule by the shed.
We hear loud STOMPING. Jason bursts into the kitchen.
walks over to Dilsey and grabs her arm.

He

JASON
(yelling)
Who was in my room last night?
Dilsey, startled, stares at Jason, her spatula in hand.
yanks back her arm.
DILSEY
Good lord, what in the name ofJason points at the ceiling.

She

107
JASON
Somebody's robbed me.
Benjy starts moaning, looking back and forth between Jason
and Dilsey. Dilsey shrugs. She walks over to Benjy and puts
her arm around him, pets his head and hushes him.
DILSEY
I haven't seen anyone go in there.
Dilsey turns and flips a pancake.
Jason looks around the kitchen.
Versh with the mule.

He looks outside and sees

Dilsey sees Jason looking at Versh.
You, Jason-

She shakes her head.

DILSEY (CONT'D)
Jason takes her shoulders and shakes her.
JASON
(yelling)
Who went into my room?
Jason?

MRS. COMPSON (O.S.)
Jason lets go of Dilsey, turns around and sees Mrs. Compson
stading in the doorway of the kitchen. She is is her late
60s now, looking shriveled, tired and pale. She leans in
the doorway, looking stern and confused.
MRS. COMPSON (CONT'D)
What is this? You know I'm notJASON
(yelling)
I've been robbed. In my own house.
Mrs. Compson stares at him.
MRS. COMPSON
What on earth do you mean?
Jason rubs his forehead and laughs.
DILSEY
You, Miss Caroline and Miss Quentin
are the only ones that ever go
upstairs.
Jason stops and looks at Dilsey.

108
JASON
Where is she?
Dilsey shrugs and flips a pancake.
fork on the table.

Benjy moans, drops his

DILSEY
She ain't come down yet, on Sunday
morning, she in bed like she usually
isJason runs out of the kitchen, shoving his mother aside.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - MORNING
Jason runs up the stairs and down the hallway, stops infront
of a door and bursts in. He stops when he sees-The bed is empty, no one is in the room and the window is
wide open. The curtains flutter in the wind and branches
from the tree outside scrape against the window pane.
Jason frantically looks behind furniture, in the closet and
under the bed. Nothing. He stops when he sees a pamphlet on
the bureau.
He picks it up and sees it's a train schedule. He opens the
top drawer in the bureau. Empty. He opens another drawer,
also empty. He pulls out another drawer, only a few things
have been left behind.
Furious, he runs out of the room.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - MORNING
Jason runs down the stairs. Mrs. Compson and Dilsey stare
at him. When Jason reaches the bottom of the steps Dilsey
goes back into the kitchen. He walks past his mother and
opens the front door.
MRS. COMPSON
Jason where are you going?
Jason stops and turns to look at his mother.
door and stares at her.

He slams the

JASON
(yelling)
I've been robbed by the very child I
could have thrown to the streets,
but instead supported for fifteen
years.

109
Jason, his face red with anger, stares at his mother, who
slowly steps away from him. He holds his hands, in fists,
up to her face.
JASON (CONT'D)
I've worked my hands to the bone to
keep this family together, under a
roof and fed, and for what?
Mrs. Compson watches him, scared.
JASON (CONT'D)
So that the bastard child of my harlot
sister could rob me of everything.
So I'll tell you where I'm going, I
don't give a damn about anyone
anymore, I just want my money.
Jason opens the door and exits the house. He gets in his
car, turns on the engine and speeds down the road, dust clouds
forming behind him.
EXT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
Jason's car pulls up in the train station parking lot with a
SCREECH. He exits the car and runs into the train station.
INT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
He looks around the train station, realizes it's empty. He
runs up to the ticket booth, the Salesperson stares at him.
JASON
Did a blond girl come in here to buy
a ticket?
The Salesperson peers at Jason.
JASON (CONT'D)
Freckles on the nose? Green eyes?
The Salesperson nods.

Jason nods back.

JASON (CONT'D)
Where did she buy a ticket for?
The Salesperson thinks for a beat.
SALESPERSON
Either Nashville or Memphis, not
sure.
Jason rubs his forehead and grinds his teeth.

110
JASON
Do you remember which one?
The Salesperson shrugs.
SALESPERSON
What's the difference? They both in
Tennessee.
Jason takes a deep breath.
JASON
Was it Memphis?
The Salesperson shrugs.
SALESPERSON
I don't recall. She on the train
anyhow, why does it matter now?
Jason sighs.
JASON
Because that's where her damn mother
is.
The Salesperson stares at Jason, confused. Jason sighs and
stares at the train tracks outside the door.
SALESPERSON
You want to buy a ticket? The next
train to Memphis is in three hours.
Jason stares at the tracks. He looks at the ground and
breathes deeply. He looks up at the Salesperson, who watches
him.
Jason shakes his head.
No.
The Salesperson nods.

JASON
Jason walks away.

EXT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
Jason walks out of the station, approaches his car and gets
in. He sits, hands on the wheel, staring straight ahead.
He sits silent and motionless.
He takes his keys and starts the engine.

111
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - DAY
Jason enters the Compson house, closes the door behind him
and walks to the library. He enters the room, stares at his
father's liquor cabinet.
He approaches the liquor cabinet, opens it and looks at all
of the paraphanalia: an assortment of glasses, bottles of
liquor, empty ice buckets etc. He takes out a glass and a
bottle of whiskey.
He pours himself a drink and stares at the brown liquor. He
downs the whole thing in one gulp. He winces, clears his
throat and pours himself another one, downs that one as well.
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE PORCH - DAY
Jason exits onto the porch, holding a new drink, a cigarette
in his mouth. He walks down the front steps and leans on
the rail, exhaling smoke. He takes a sip from his drink.
He looks at the golf course across the house, empty. He
looks at the pasture in front of the house, the fence and
then looks down the hill. He takes a drag from his cigarette
and peers down the hill. He sees-Benjy sitting by the creek, watching the water and the trees
around him. He is motionless and calm.
Jason finishes his drink. He takes a last puff from his
cigarette and tosses it on the ground. He steps on the
cigarette, slowly twisting it into the ground with his shoe
until it blends in with the dirt.
CUT TO BLACK
Brenna:
A few minimal cuts and a change of order at the end.

INT. COMPSON HOUSE HALLWAY - MORNING
Jason runs down the stairs. Mrs. Compson and Dilsey stare
at him. When Jason reaches the bottom of the steps Dilsey
goes back into the kitchen. He walks passes his mother and
opens the front door.
MRS. COMPSON
Jason where are you going?
Jason stops and turns to look at his mother.

112
JASON
(yelling)
I've been robbed by the very child I
could have thrown to the streets,
but instead supported for fifteen
years.
Jason, his face red with anger, stares at his mother, who
slowly steps away from him.
He holds his hands, in fists, up to her face.
JASON (CONT'D)
I've worked my hands to the bone to
keep this family together, under a
roof and fed, and for what?
Mrs. Compson watches him, scared.
JASON (CONT'D)
So that the bastard child of my harlot
sister could rob me of everything.
So I'll tell you where I'm going, I
don't give a damn about anyone
anymore, I just want my money.
Jason opens the door and exits the house. He gets in his
car, turns on the engine and speeds down the road, dust clouds
forming behind him.
EXT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
Jason's car pulls up in the train station parking lot with a
SCREECH. He exits the car and runs into the train station.
INT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
He looks around the train station, realizes it's empty. He
runs up to the ticket booth, the Salesperson stares at him.
JASON
Did a blond girl come in here to buy
a ticket?
The Salesperson peers at Jason.
JASON (CONT'D)
Freckles on the nose? Green eyes?
The Salesperson nods.

Jason nods back.

JASON (CONT'D)
Where did she buy a ticket for?
The Salesperson thinks for a beat.

113
SALESPERSON
Either Nashville or Memphis, not
sure.
Jason rubs his forehead and grinds his teeth.
JASON
Do you remember which one?
The Salesperson shrugs.
SALESPERSON
There ain't much difference, they
both in Tennessee.
Jason takes a deep breath.
JASON
Was it Memphis?
SALESPERSON
I don't recall. She on the train
anyhow, why does it matter now?
JASON
Because that's where her damn mother
is.
The Salesperson stares at Jason, confused. Jason sighs and
stares at the train tracks outside the door.
SALESPERSON
You want to buy a ticket? The next
train to Memphis is in three hours.
Jason stares at the tracks. He looks at the ground and
breathes deeply. He looks up at the Salesperson, who watches
him.
Jason shakes his head.
No.

JASON
Jason walks away.
EXT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
Jason walks out of the station, approaches his car and gets
in. He sits, hands on the wheel, staring straight ahead,
silent and motionless.
He starts the engine.

114
EXT. COMPSON HOUSE - DAY
Jason parks his car, exits, a lit cigarette in his mouth.
He leans on the rail on the front porch, exhaling smoke. He
looks at the golf course across the house, empty. He looks
at the pasture in front of the house, the fence and then
looks down the hill. He takes a drag from his cigarette and
peers down the hill. He sees-Benjy sitting by the creek, watching the water and the trees
around him, motionless and calm.
Jason takes a last puff from his cigarette and tosses it on
the ground. He steps on the cigarette, slowly twisting it
into the ground with his shoe until it blends in with the
dirt.
INT. COMPSON HOUSE LIBRARY - DAY
Jason enters the Compson house, closes the door behind him
and walks to the library. He enters the room, stares at his
father's liquor cabinet.
He approaches the liquor cabinet, opens it and looks at all
of the paraphanalia: an assortment of glasses, bottles of
liquor, an empty ice bucket etc. He takes out a glass and a
bottle of whiskey.
He pours himself a drink and downs the whole thing in one
gulp. He winces, clears his throat and pours himself another
one, downs that one as well. He pours another, stares at
the brown liquor. He sees his face reflected in the glass
of whiskey.
CUT TO BLACK

