Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2012

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2012

The Sapling and Other Stories
Hannah R. Rikoon
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Rikoon, Hannah R., "The Sapling and Other Stories" (2012). Senior Projects Spring 2012. Paper 346.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2012/346

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2012 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

The Sapling
& Other Stories
by
Hannah Rose Rikoon

Senior Project submitted to
The Department of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

Annandale-on-Hudson
May 2012

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

ii	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Preface
	  

	  
I	  have	  forgotten	  who	  I	  am.	  All	  I	  know	  are	  words.	  Words	  are	  in	  my	  mind	  and	  on	  the	  

page	  in	  front	  of	  me.	  They	  are	  spoken	  around	  me	  and	  invite	  me	  to	  respond.	  	  
Although	  I	  am	  not	  a	  religious	  person,	  I	  remind	  myself	  that	  in	  the	  beginning	  was	  the	  
word;	  language	  is	  the	  bearer	  of	  life,	  the	  beginning	  of	  it	  all.	  	  
Thank	  god	  I	  was	  able	  to	  forget	  myself,	  because	  if	  I	  had	  not,	  my	  own	  words	  may	  
never	  have	  come.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

iii	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Acknowledgements
	  

	  
Thank you to my mother and father for always trusting and believing in me.
Thank you to my sister, Robyn, for pushing me to grow.
Thank you Robert Kelly for guiding my curiosity and creativity.

	  

	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

iv	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Table of Contents	  
	   	  
Fog………………………………………………………………1-42

The Sapling…………………………………………………...43-77

Stolen Hats……..…………………………………………….78-99
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

v	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Introduction
	  A	  strong	  desire	  to	  explore	  the	  voices	  and	  lives	  of	  different	  characters	  guided	  me	  
through	  this	  project.	  When	  I	  began	  writing	  I	  did	  not	  have	  a	  clear	  picture	  of	  who	  would	  pop	  
out	  of	  my	  imagination	  and	  appear	  on	  paper.	  Prose	  offered	  a	  free	  form	  to	  allow	  my	  thoughts	  
to	  flow	  uninterrupted;	  I	  was	  breaking	  out	  of	  old	  habits.	  Writing	  poetry	  was	  a	  kind	  of	  
personal	  catharsis	  for	  me,	  an	  important	  journey	  to	  go	  through	  as	  writer,	  but	  not	  accessible	  
for	  those	  who	  read	  my	  work.	  The	  line	  breaks	  in	  poetry	  distracted	  me.	  I	  focused	  too	  heavily	  
on	  when	  to	  break	  instead	  of	  allowing	  the	  poem	  to	  unfold.	  I	  have	  found	  poetry	  serves	  as	  a	  
tool	  to	  begin	  writing.	  It	  is	  the	  rag	  from	  which	  I	  squeeze	  out	  my	  emotions	  and	  confusions.	  
	  
	  

On	  a	  rainy	  day	  in	  September	  I	  sat	  in	  my	  kitchen	  with	  a	  spark	  of	  inspiration	  to	  begin	  a	  

piece.	  The	  day	  before	  I	  had	  written	  a	  poem	  in	  the	  form	  of	  a	  dialogue	  between	  an	  old	  couple.	  
They	  were	  saying	  their	  last	  goodbyes	  to	  each	  other	  after	  a	  long	  life	  together.	  I	  sipped	  my	  
tea	  and	  the	  watched	  the	  flag	  on	  the	  porch	  of	  the	  bookstore	  next	  to	  my	  apartment	  blow	  in	  
the	  wind.	  That	  is	  how	  Richard	  and	  Sue	  Crowfoot,	  the	  characters	  of	  “Fog”	  came	  to	  be.	  
Through	  my	  belief	  in	  them	  I	  was	  able	  to	  explore	  a	  topic	  I	  had	  experienced	  first	  hand	  with	  
my	  dear	  friend	  who	  withdrew	  from	  Bard	  to	  fight	  Leukemia.	  The	  stem	  cells	  and	  bone	  
marrow	  transplant	  proved	  helpful	  for	  Marina	  but	  they	  did	  not	  cure	  her	  of	  her	  cancer.	  She	  is	  
still	  being	  treated	  after	  a	  series	  of	  relapses.	  
	  

The	  advancements	  taking	  place	  in	  the	  biomedical	  field	  are	  astounding.	  If	  Marina	  had	  

been	  diagnosed	  ten	  years	  ago	  she	  would	  not	  have	  survived	  the	  onset	  of	  her	  disease.	  Her	  
treatments	  have	  been	  heavily	  based	  on	  gene	  therapy	  and	  stem	  cells,	  both	  of	  which	  are	  

	  

	   	  
	  
vi	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
fairly	  recent	  medical	  discoveries.	  This	  led	  me	  to	  the	  writings	  and	  talks	  of	  Ray	  Kurzweil,	  a	  
man	  who	  believes	  death	  does	  not	  have	  to	  be	  a	  part	  of	  life	  and	  is	  on	  a	  mission	  to	  turn	  the	  
human	  body	  into	  a	  system	  of	  computerized	  cells,	  communicating	  with	  each	  other	  in	  code.	  
Possibly	  by	  the	  year	  2040,	  doctors	  will	  be	  able	  to	  redesign	  bodies	  from	  the	  inside	  out	  with	  
programmed	  computers	  the	  size	  of	  red	  blood	  cells.	  I	  am	  thankful	  for	  the	  benefits	  of	  
technology,	  yet	  I	  cannot	  help	  but	  feel	  disgust	  towards	  a	  man	  who	  is	  pushing	  for	  the	  human	  
body	  to	  take	  such	  an	  unnatural	  turn.	  	  
Death	  became	  a	  strong	  theme	  in	  the	  piece.	  I	  realized	  I	  believe	  death	  is	  just	  as	  
important	  as	  birth.	  It	  is	  everything	  in	  between	  that	  matters.	  Therefore	  how	  can	  any	  life	  
have	  meaning	  if	  an	  end	  is	  not	  in	  sight?	  The	  finality	  of	  a	  life	  makes	  every	  action,	  every	  
feeling,	  and	  every	  circumstance	  incredibly	  powerful.	  Why	  did	  the	  Gods	  of	  mythology	  envy	  
humans	  so	  much?	  Because	  humans	  savor	  the	  one	  life	  they	  have	  been	  given.	  Immortality	  is	  a	  
curse;	  life	  and	  death	  are	  a	  blessing.	  
	  
	  “The	  Sapling”	  is	  not	  a	  traditional	  narrative.	  It	  is	  a	  meditation	  on	  three	  voices:	  a	  little	  
boy,	  his	  mother,	  and	  his	  father.	  I	  allowed	  the	  voices	  to	  take	  me	  wherever	  they	  wanted	  to;	  I	  
did	  not	  think	  about	  the	  outcome;	  I	  did	  not	  think	  about	  whether	  the	  dots	  connected	  or	  if	  the	  
story	  made	  sense.	  I	  wanted	  to	  allow	  the	  voices	  to	  be	  as	  free	  as	  they	  could	  be,	  unattached	  to	  
plot,	  unattached	  to	  purpose.	  The	  more	  I	  wrote	  the	  less	  free	  it	  became.	  I	  could	  not	  let	  go.	  I	  
worried	  that	  my	  reader	  would	  not	  be	  able	  to	  connect	  to	  the	  shifty	  characters.	  I	  am	  not	  sure	  
if	  the	  story	  is	  about	  the	  same	  three	  voices,	  the	  same	  family,	  or	  even	  the	  same	  little	  boy,	  but	  I	  
chose	  to	  stick	  to	  my	  initial	  intention.	  The	  characters	  are	  nameless	  and	  remain	  mysterious	  
in	  their	  complexity.	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

vii	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The	  last	  piece,	  “Stolen	  Hats,”	  was	  created	  from	  a	  dream	  I	  had	  a	  couple	  of	  years	  ago.	  It	  
is	  a	  reflection	  of	  my	  effort	  to	  write	  lightheartedly.	  When	  I	  took	  myself	  less	  seriously	  the	  
characters	  unfolded	  quite	  naturally.	  I	  discovered	  a	  silly	  side	  of	  myself,	  one	  that	  I	  usually	  
keep	  to	  myself	  because	  the	  silliness	  is	  rooted	  in	  judgments	  I	  make	  about	  the	  world.	  	  I	  
realized,	  however,	  that	  everyone	  makes	  assumptions.	  The	  assumptions	  are	  usually	  off	  
target	  but	  they	  make	  for	  great	  writing	  material.	  I	  gathered	  my	  somewhat	  bitter	  and	  off-­‐
putting	  ideas	  and	  turned	  them	  upside	  down	  to	  shine	  them	  in	  a	  different	  light.	  What	  came	  
out	  was	  somewhat	  of	  a	  Socratic	  dialogue	  between	  a	  woman	  and	  the	  lovers	  of	  her	  past.	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

1	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Fog
Part One
His hands shook with the slight tremor of a man beyond his years. Clasped between them
he held a mask meant to be his one and only distraction for the evening, that was, until the phone
rang.
Richard Crowfoot sat at the desk in his office above the Lost Shore Bookstore. His feet
were propped up and he leaned back in his rickety chair. A faded twenty-fifth anniversary banner
still clung to the wooden beams in the ceiling. The letters sagged making the ‘o’s in books
appear as tired droopy eyes.
The office was packed tightly with books from floor to ceiling and smelled of pipe
tobacco and cat litter. Richard ignored the ringing phone as it reverberated off the surrounding
hardback books whose fabric covers had worn feeble with time.
The mask he held was a simple green monster his grandson had made. The canvas was a
paper plate painted with delicate shades of watercolor. He put it up to his face. The eyes were cut
out uneven. The slits weren’t quite large enough to see out of. The nose was created by an
outward jut of some sticky material that smelled a bit like raspberry jam but resembled a glob of
white glue with wooden beads stuck to it. He didn’t intend on wearing it, but if he decided to
venture out into the night, perhaps to catch the end of the Red Sox game at the tavern, maybe he
would honor the spirit of Halloween and be the monster his grandson wanted him to be.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

2	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Richard took a deep breath and stood up for the first time in a couple of hours. His legs
were stiff and he looked around for his cane.
He hobbled past the ringing phone and went downstairs to make a pot of coffee. His
usual three to six cups a day helped him take breaks from the paperwork and case materials
permanently spread across his desk, a desk that had served his father and his grandfather before
him. It had taken him months to refinish the cherry and find inlays of Connemara marble. He
imported it from Ireland to restore the desk to its original mystique, an expense that cost him a
pretty penny. When he felt he had done his best, he had to find four men to help him haul it up
the stairs and push it into his westward facing office. It was no picnic. That desk bore its years in
weight.
Richard filled the coffee filter with freshly ground beans and saw through the kitchen
window his wife’s high-pinned bun rise just over the wooden fence of the garden. Sue was
outside harvesting the last of the tomatoes before the frost set in that evening.
The sound of the phone was no longer audible as the screen door slammed shut behind
him. He walked along the stone path that led to their small garden, opened the latched gate, and
grabbed a harvesting basket from the tool shed. All he could hear was the autumn air pushing its
way through his jacket and around the tiny hairs in his ears. The breeze tickled the trees around
him; their few leaves held on to the branches with all their might, the thrill of the height was
more exciting than the fall would be, and perhaps not as painful.
The sun was warming the damp ground where Richard walked. He stepped carefully
between the garden beds trying not to trample any plants. He stood in front of a patch of yellow
tomatoes and began to pull them from their stems. Sue was doing the same, but kneeled in front
of her plant and worked at a faster pace. Any work in the garden went faster with more hands,

	  

	   	  
	  
3	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
and was always more fun with another person. Richard always appreciated spending a few hours
in the garden everyday to refresh his mind, but soon winter would keep both of them inside the
house working on projects here and there when the bookstore was closed.
Nowadays Richard worked off the books on special investigation cases. Many of his
cases were unsolved and hauntingly whispered to him as he fell asleep at night. He did more
investigating in his head than anywhere else by going over the details of a case ad nauseam.
When they were done picking tomatoes, Richard helped Sue carry the buckets into the
house for her to begin canning. His coffee was hot and ready.
The phone rang again.
“Are you going to get that?” Sue asked as she sliced a tomato into four quarters.
“I don’t feel like answering the phone, its just one of those days, I just want quiet.”
“It could be Thala calling about Thanksgiving.” She said patiently in protest. She knew
Richard didn’t enjoy speaking on the telephone, even if it was his own daughter.
He grunted and grabbed his steaming mug. The ringing guided him upstairs and down the
hallway to his office. He pushed open the brass knobbed door and made a beeline for the shaking
receiver.
The Crowfoots only had one telephone in the house and neither of them had cell phones.
Both he and Sue knew that if anyone wanted to reach them they would call the house and if no
one answered they would leave a message. The answering machine had been the same for years,
first Richard would say, “Hello, you’ve reached the Crowfoot Household. We sell books not
crow’s feet—” then Sue would chime in with the humor that Richard lacked with his monotone
voice, “we’re not in. If we don’t already have your number please include it in your message, to

	  

	   	  
	  
4	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
reach the Lost Shore Bookstore please dial 04 instead of 05” and then together they said, “Have a
splendid day!”
They had purchased their two story brick building after moving to Camden over three
decades ago. Over the past twenty years the town had changed into quite the tourist destination.
The harbor attracted couples for romantic sunset sails and families for catamaran excursions out
into the Atlantic. The nearby cliffs of Camden Hills lured rock climbers to scale the steep routes
up to the ledges overlooking Megunticook Lake and eastward across the ocean. Camden was
known as a great getaway for all ages in every season. Local delectables of fresh seafood were
available for most of the year and Cappy’s Chowder house boasted the best clam chowder in all
of Maine.
The Lost Shore Bookstore faced Elm Street and welcomed each passerby with its large
storefront windows and dangling wooden sign. Once inside the bookstore there were four rooms
stacked from floor to ceiling with shelves of books. In the back room there was a door that led to
their kitchen. When Sue cooked, rich smells seeped underneath the cracks and infiltrated the
store adding a homey feeling for browsing customers. There were times when Richard would
peer above his reading glasses at a child or hungry looking father asking him what the delicious
smell was. “Oh that’s my dinner,” he would reply and then look down again to whatever it was
he had been reading.
Camden had been the perfect place for Richard and Sue. Richard settled down in his early
forties after retiring from his post at the Coast Guard after twenty years in the service. He joined
the Coast Guard straight out of high school. Having been a star athlete with the choice to attend
college at two very fine Universities, free of tuition, he chose instead to model his everyday life
on the strict schedule of a cadet at the United States Coast Guard Academy. After his duties

	  

	   	  
	  
5	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
ended he missed life out at sea like a sickness so he chose to stay with the Guard to become an
Ensign. He moved to Portland and shortly thereafter he was promoted to Lieutenant and onwards
awarded the title of an Officer. He felt most at home out at sea. After a long day the soft motion
of the boat rocked him to sleep. He thrived on the salty air and each morning in his position at
the helm he inhaled the tobacco he packed tightly into his old meerschaum pipe.
He was awarded the honor of becoming an Admiral after twenty years, and at age thirtyeight he retired. After a couple of years working odd jobs and maintaining a happy lifestyle of
sailing and juggling around ideas to start his own business, the Portland police force showed
interest in hiring him. He went through a series of interviews and personality tests. They trained
him for fourteen months before he was granted a gun and badge. The benefits included health
care for him and his family (once he had one) and a handsome annual salary that would allow
him to travel and buy anything he wanted or needed. He met Sue shortly after he joined the
force. They met at Fort Allen Park on a summer day in 1973. He proposed and married her two
years later. They were expecting their first child after seven months of marriage and chose to
name her Thala, short for Thalassa, his little goddess of the sea.
Upon receiving merit for his service of thirty-five years, Richard turned seventy-seven
and decided to lighten his load. After so many years of high stress cases, his nerves were testy
and a chunk had been chipped off the block of his mental happiness. He went through phases of
breakdowns and panic attacks, and finally with as much audacity as he could muster he asked to
give up his position.
That happened three years to the day. Now he only participated in what he called high
interest cases. They were the ones that really took a knocking on him. He couldn’t refuse them

	  

	   	  
	  
6	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
for fear of missing the rush of solving a case, saving a life, or turning in a criminal. But that life
came with sacrifices.
The phone was still ringing.
“You want to take this call, Ruby?” He asked his aging calico cat who was napping on
top of last Sunday’s newspaper. “Sometimes I wish I was a cat so I wouldn’t have to deal with
all this nonsense,” he said in response to her sleepy eyelids. He picked up the phone mid-ring,
“Richard speaking.”
“Happy Halloween sir,” he recognized the voice on the other line immediately, “Charlie
here. We have the results from the autopsy sir. There’s something,” Charlie paused, “peculiar
about the body, similar to the Whittler case.”
Exactly forty-nine hours ago Richard was motoring back to the harbor in his 32-foot
sloop after an afternoon of sailing when he saw something cast ashore near the south side of
Curtis Island. He noticed a head of hair and quickly realized it was a drowned body. He radioed
the station and asked for a team to meet him at the island. He circled the island looking for any
survivors. The rescue team came in a patrol boat and quickly took the body. He hadn’t worried
about it since. People drowned all the time and he always thought a soul was lucky to be lost to
the sea, but similarities to the Whittler case had reason to be concerned.
Richard agreed to meet Charlie at the funeral home. He stood up, cracked his back in
both directions, nuzzled Ruby on her forehead and grabbed his hat and cane. Sue was still
downstairs chopping tomatoes.
“Was it Thala?” She asked without looking up from her cutting board. “No unfortunately
not, it was Charlie,” she looked up. Richard continued, “there’s something I need to take a look
over at Ellen’s,” her eyebrows shifted downwards in perplexity. He kissed her on the cheek. “I’ll

	  

	   	  
	  
7	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
be back in time for dinner. We’ll talk about it when I get home.” As he pulled open the door of
his car he heard the phone ring again upstairs. Sue clunked up the stairs to pick it up. He waited a
couple seconds just in case it was Charlie calling to change his mind. He stood with his bad knee
propped up in the car and the other planted on the ground. His right hand held firmly onto the
steering wheel ready to pull himself into into the driver’s seat. He waited, but silence was the
only answer. It must have been Thala calling to plan her trip up from Philadelphia. He started the
engine and left Ruby peering after him in the upstairs window, a faint yellow aura glowed
around her.
~
Richard drove north on Elm Street passing the harbor on his right to veer left onto
Mountain Street. He pulled into the parking lot of the Longley Family Funeral home. Charlie
was waiting for him outside. He was a robust looking man of about forty, a balding bachelor
without any prospects. He was smoking a little cigar with one arm crossed over his protruding
potbelly to support the weight of his smoking one. When he saw Richard pull into the parking lot
he nodded his head in a greeting and shifted his weight away from the patrol car he was leaning
on.
“Thanks for coming out today sir,” he said extending his hand for a firm shake. “I wanted
you to see this for yourself.” Charlie had always respected Agent Crowfoot for his history in the
field. He took one last inhale on his cigar before licking the pads of his thumb and pointer finger
to put it out. He opened his brown overcoat and placed the unfinished cigar in his pocket. “We’ll
make this a quick one,” he said as he held the door open for Richard.
As soon as he entered the lobby, Richard could smell the familiar potpourri that Ellen, the
owner of the funeral home, always refreshed to keep the environment welcoming and uplifting,

	  

	   	  
	  
8	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
despite the reality of such a place. It always reminded him of his aunt’s closet, the only thing that
was missing was the mothball smell to top it off.
There were people waiting on the plush velvet sofas. They all looked morose, the
expression on their faces were downcast in a stagnant frown, but the youngest girl, who looked
to be about four, was exploring the room as if she was on a treasure hunt. She was extremely
curious as to what everything felt like and even tasted the draw lines on the curtains. Richard
took notice of her right away. Her black dress with yellow ribbon around the rims reminded him
of one Thala had worn when she was around that age. The girl’s mother beckoned for her and
she turned around, saw Richard staring at her, and ran to hide her head in her mother’s lap.
Across the room was a worn out woman with her head resting on the shoulder of a man
who looked like he could have been a ghost. His face was grey and his hair was tightly tied in a
long ponytail at the base of his skull. His eyes were just as black as his hair and appeared even
darker because of the puffy half moons under his sleep-bereft eyes. Richard could not help but
stare at the couple who looked like a match made in heaven, both disheveled to the point that
they no longer cared who looked at them, or what they were looking at; it even seemed they
didn’t care where they were. There was a sliver of drool hanging out of the woman’s open
mouth. It landed softly on the canvas of the man’s jacket. He didn’t seem to notice the excreting
saliva or the obvious stare coming from Richard. Charlie tapped Richard on the shoulder and
directed him down the stairs into the basement.
The smell was no longer of fresh potpourri. There was not even a hint of a flower down
on this level of the house. They were underground. The only smell that was describable was that
of formaldehyde: the suffocating, gaseous smell of a chemical that is made to lengthen the life of
decomposing of flesh. He knew the smell well. The first time he had encountered it was on his

	  

	   	  
	  
9	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
first case. It was a minor homicide. A case that turned out to be a raped high school junior, a
seventeen year-old who was hoping to win the title of queen that night but was found beneath a
dock at the Portland marina.
The lights down in the basement were buzzing with the irritating sound a bulb makes
before it flashes one last time and is extinguished forever. Ellen’s son, Sean, was down in the lab
going over the test results that had come in from the lab earlier that morning.
Sean was leaning over the counter when he noticed the two men come in. He stood up
straight and opened the glass door that separated the dead from the living.
“She’s in here,” he said as he slid the door wide enough for them to fit through. “I am
glad you got here when you did, her mother and father are upstairs waiting for her to be placed in
the coffin. They’re taking her back to Ohio for the service tomorrow. You knew she was from
Cincinnati? I had no idea. How did she end up in the West Penobscot Bay?” Charlie was silent
and looked a bit annoyed at his short rant.
“Richard, meet Sean.” Charlie waited a moment. “Sean, this is the Admiral.” Sean had
heard about the famous Admiral Crowfoot from his mother, but didn’t say a word; he shook his
hand and looked to Charlie for the order of things. It had been almost two years since the
Admiral was called in to inspect a body. It was Sean’s first year working in the family business
and recently things had been a little weird.
“Alright,” Charlie made one loud clap between his hands, “let’s not waste time, her
family is waiting for her. ”
They approached the side of the dissection table. Richard shuddered. Her flesh was sewn
up and the formaldehyde pumping through her veins made her skin glow a bland shade of pink, a
rosy red that was most definitely overshadowed by the blue tinge of her bloated body. He had

	  

	   	  
	  
10	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
seen victims of drowning, but had never seen anything like this; her flesh was gnawed all over,
she had been a floating buffet for shrimp and other hungry nibblers in the water for weeks. There
were craters of wounds all over her. Her face hardly looked human. Her eyes and nose were no
longer there and puffy lips peeled back to reveal swollen gums and half hidden teeth.
“Pretty remarkable huh?” Charlie commented on Richards gaping expression.
“I couldn’t believe her family came all the way to take her back. They couldn’t afford to fly her
out. It’s definitely going to be a closed casket wake.” He raised his eyebrows as he put plastic
medical gloves on both his hands. “Her mother and father already saw her,” he took a deep
breath as the gloves snapped tightly around his large wrists. “She had been missing for almost a
month, but we couldn’t get any more details from them than that. End of story.”
“Why not?” Richard asked. Sean sank off to the side.
“They were sworn to some confidentiality agreement with the treatment center she had
been sent to. When she was sixteen, age of death eighteen, she was diagnosed with stomach
cancer and her family sent her to some clinic to be treated. They wont disclose the name or
location. They signed a paper and took an oath. They’re pretty traditional folks. They didn’t want
her cremated, they are set on burying her in their family plot.” He began to chuckle. The sucking
of the air ventilation system muffled the sound of his laugh.
“Now listen to this,” Charlie sighed, “the results from the autopsy are similar to what we
saw with the Whittler case: an atypical organ anatomy. The girl’s body was mutated. There’s
something strange going on here. I am afraid to admit it, but we’re pretty much in the dark here
Admiral.” His face looked morose and disappointed. The expression resembled a little leaguer
who had just lost his chance to make it to the semi-finals.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

11	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Richard absorbed the information as he stared past Charlie. The Whittler case was one of
three that Richard was still investigating. They all had a common thread: Unexplainable
Anatomical Alterations or ‘U Double A’ as Charlie’s forensic team called it.
“The reason we knew something was wacky with her stomach,” Charlie continued, “was
because of this—” he lifted her black blouse with his plastic covered sausage shaped fingers and
revealed a series of orange circles below the left side of her rib cage. “In the spirit of Halloween
eh?” His humor was as horrible as his breath. Richard came closer to the body. The orange
circles were randomly scattered but constricted to a three-inch circumference. He reached in his
pocket for reading glasses, grabbed a pair of medical gloves, and put on a breathing mask to help
with the smell. He leaned over her body and pushed down on the spot infected area. If Charlie
and Sean had no context as to who Richard was or why he was there, they would have thought he
was a mad scientist. He pushed down on her stomach and he dropped his head to one side to
listen to the effect. His fingers began to sink deep into her flesh, causing the cadaver to shift a
little against the pressure.
He raised his head. “What did you put down on record for cause of death?” Richard
asked blankly.
“It was a drowning. Her lungs were clogged with salt water. She—”
He was no longer listening; his eyes were squinting against the salty air stinging his face.
His feet were slightly over the edge of the shoreline; little pebbles fell down and splashed into
the ocean far below him. His boots were splattered with blood from the hog they had slaughtered
at his uncle’s farm. The squeals were still ringing inside his head and all he wanted was the wind
to replace them with a gentle hushing sound, like his mothers breaths in between the words of
stories she read him before he fell asleep.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

12	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The eyes. He remembered them as if they had just flashed in front of him. The hog’s eyes
had burned with the wish to live, the wish to bask in the sun for endless days and rub against the
cool mud of the earth hoping that the heat from his skin would evaporate and fill the humid air
around him with a gentle mist.
The wind pulled his arms out and away from his sides and he leaned his head up towards
the sky. An airplane flew above him, creating a direct line between the sun, the body of the metal
winged aircraft and his own vertical body. What a good day to fly. He took a breath in and
exhaled slowly looking across the sea. He knew his father would be wondering where he was.
They went up to Maine every August to help with his uncle’s slaughter and leave with a penny or
so of the earnings. His father always complained that it wasn’t even enough to pay for the boy’s
schoolbooks, but his mother always said that the fresh air away from Boston did the whole
family good. Yes, if by fresh air you mean pig shit and the smell of death, he had heard his father
mutter under his breath.
When will you be ready to die? His younger brother had asked him earlier that day at
breakfast. Just like the hog, we don’t have a choice. He wondered whether the answer was a true
one, whether death could and should be a choice one makes for himself. Birth being a passage,
so is death, but birth is not a choice, so why should death be?
Richard’s mind flashed forward to the day their dog had been hit by a car, its neck bent
backwards, its spine broken. Thala had screamed and ran into the house. When Richard heard her
his heart jumped and his legs sprung him out of his chair. She could barely communicate what
happened and just pointed with her little fingers out towards the road. He ran outside hoping Sue
was safe and when he saw a car pulled over and Sue and the driver bending over something in
the road he knew it was their collie Pearl who had been hit. She died a few minutes later. Their

	  

	   	  
	  
13	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
family’s grief for the animal was like the death of a sibling, though he knew the death of a child
was worse than that of a pet, far worse, stinging the heart with a black sadness forever. When he
knelt down to rest a hand on Annie’s suffering body, he felt a sudden gratitude that it wasn’t
Thala that had been hit.
“Richard, are you alright?” Charlie asked. Richard nodded his head in an effort to
refocus.
“Yes, obviously it’s drowning, but are you sure her that’s how she initially died?”
“Whether it was an accident or a suicide is unclear, but there’s no evidence of rape or
misconduct,” Charlie pulled off his gloves and threw them in the trash. “Lets get a cup of coffee
Admiral, there’s a lot to discuss here.” He looked over to the corner where Sean had been
standing. “Thanks for your time Sean. And good job with the body, its not easy to make a
drowned girl look that pretty.” He winked and headed towards the door. Sean refitted the girl’s
blouse, chased all the wrinkles out of it, and picked up both her hands to rest them neatly on her
chest, one on top of the other. Richard watched as he conducted the ceremonious movements.
“Admiral,” Charlie said as he held the door open, “let’s get this show on the road.”
~
The afternoon slipped quickly into evening as Richard and Charlie sat at Peter Ott’s
Steakhouse and Tavern. It was one of Richard’s favorite places. It had been there since Richard
could remember and still served the best steak and fries. Today he wasn’t there for his usual
entrée, but his usual spot: the quiet booth that was tucked in the back of the restaurant. It
conveniently offered both comfort and confidentiality.
“I am glad we decided to make this one a beer instead of a cup of joe,” Charlie said
after he took a large gulp of his Guinness and leaned back into the soft cushioned booth.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

14	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Richard sipped his Stella and watched the Sox game out of the corner of his eye. They
were down ten to four at the bottom of the seventh. They still had a chance. The bartender below
the television caught his attention. He was dressed like a zombie, his eye sockets were painted
black and his neck had a line of fake blood near his Adam’s apple to make it seem like he had
been slit straight across the throat. Richard couldn’t help but think of the girl’s empty eye sockets
and bloated cheeks.
“I am ready to wind down for the day,” Richard mumbled without looking at Charlie.
He knew he must head home for supper shortly. He agreed to stay for a drink because he didn’t
want to go straight home. He needed time to adjust. He reminded himself of what he knew:
Camden, Sue, Halloween, earlier in the day he picked tomatoes and nuzzled Ruby on her soft
head. All that seemed so far away. He always slipped into a different world when he was called
onto a new case. He lost himself in it. The way he lost himself in the sea. It was the same rocking
motion, the same excitement of heading out into the unknown open horizon.
“You have plans for Thanksgiving son?” He asked more cheerfully.
“I am headed down to West Bath to see my sister and her new baby.” Charlie smiled a
smile that was welcoming but lonely.
Richard smiled back. “You really don’t have any suspicion that that girl was
murdered?” he pushed on.
“Something weird is definitely going on here,” Charlie admitted and relaxed his frame.
“Why, what’s on your mind Admiral?” He leaned forward in interest, his elbows jutted out onto
the tabletop and his hands came together in a prayer position in front of his chin. His eyes were
fierce with the intensity that had brought him where he was now, one of the leading investigators
for the mid-coast state police force, a man who Richard trusted with any case.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

15	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“What’s her history? Any mental illness, depression, suicide attempts?” He was fishing
for an explanation that had no bait to lure in a bite.
“Nope, nothing, as clear as crystal, of course her family is a bit odd, but the way they
talked about her made her seem as perfect as a doll in a basket. Nothing wrong. Dedicated
student, a team player, she volunteered at their town’s hospice center.” He stopped, that seemed
like enough to convince the Admiral that she was in no way subject to taking her own life.
Why would an eighteen year old want to die? Richard thought to himself. He
remembered when Thala was that age. She had been through some awkward phases, especially
in middle school, but in high school she stayed busy with soccer and piano, always off for a
tournament or recital. She was simply too busy to get involved in drugs or caught in the wrong
crowd. He and Sue were involved with her education from the beginning, teaching her how to
read before they put her in school, and helping her with her homework when she fell behind or
was in a stump. She was a strong student throughout her years at home, and when she decided to
attend college at the University of Pennsylvania, they were sad to see her go, but glad she wasn’t
leaving them for the West, at least she was staying on the East Coast, and close to the ocean.
That was certainly reassuring for Richard.
“You know Admiral,” Charlie sat in silence for a couple of minutes as Richard fell into
the well of this thoughts, a habit that people witnessed every now and then when in his presence
for a good chunk of time, “something tells me she didn’t want to die, but didn’t have a choice.”
He paused. Richard gave him a look of interest and he continued, “I have a strange feeling
something went wrong, there was no evidence that pointed to the possibility of manhandling or
abuse—except for her odd markings.”

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

16	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“Yes, her stomach.” Richard interjected. “She probably knew she was going to die
because of her cancer, so she decided to die quickly instead of painfully.”
“Maybe.”
They both took another gulp of beer.
“We need to trace where these bodies are floating in from.”
“That’s the piece of the puzzle we can’t figure out sir. It’s starting to get under my
skin. These bodies, this is the fourth we’ve found yet we have no idea where they are coming
from. It’s pulling my strings Admiral, and we’re not getting anywhere. I feel like the conductor
of a train that just wont budge, no matter how much coal I pack into the engine.”
“Charlie, you’re a good agent. I know this is frustrating, especially when a young
victim shows up as a case, but it brings us one step closer to solving this.” Richard took the last
sip of his beer and slapped a ten-dollar bill down to cover their tab, “Well Captain, I need to get
home.”
Charlie stood up and shook the Admiral’s hand with a firm grip, “I will contact you if
anything else comes up sir.”
“Thanks for your good work. Call me anytime son,” he sounded reliable, like a friend
who really meant what he said, “don’t hesitate, I may not answer the first few times,” they
laughed lightly, “but call enough and I wont have any other choice.”
The truth was, he had no idea whether or not they were closer to solving these cases,
but something was missing, something that, once discovered, would make the two men sleep
without shadows floating above them. Richard drove straight home, past the wandering trick-ortreaters and away from the sleeping ships in the harbor.
~

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

17	  	  	  	  	  
	  

He pulled into his driveway and gazed through the sunroom windows at Sue who was
sitting at the dining room table with a glass of wine. A single candle in the middle of the table lit
her face perfectly. He could see the sharp line of her nose that led to her closed mouth, her lips
were in the position they took when she was focused. Her head was tilted downwards; she was
probably reading an article in the New Yorker or one of her favorite literary magazines. He
wanted tell her about the girl, the way Sean placed her hands gently on top of her chest in a final
resting position, but he knew she would not take the news of a death, even of someone she didn’t
know, easily.
Sue was a sensitive woman, when she heard from Jean-Louis—the baker who told her
one morning that her friend’s son was in a motorcycle accident and was taken into the critical
condition unit—she called the boy’s mother and left a message on the answering machine and
went down to the marina to cry before coming home. Later that day she found out it wasn’t her
friend’s son but a friend of the boy’s. She was somewhat relieved and prayed for the boy that
night before she went to sleep.
It’s not that she was a considerably religious woman, she was raised Catholic, but did
not attend Church except for Christmas Mass and occasionally sang in the Women’s Choir when
she felt particularly musical. She still prayed, out of habit perhaps, or because it comforted her.
Richard was used to the sound of her soft-spoken voice murmuring nightly prayers before she
lay beside him at night. Her white cotton nightgown ended at her ankles and covered her to her
wrists, but near her heart, lace was woven ornately across her chest.
He opened the door, hung up his hat and cane, and slipped into his house shoes. The
woodstove was lit and the heat calmed his nerves. Sue had cooked a butternut squash soup and
he could smell its sweetness in the air.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

18	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“My darling Susan,” he came up behind her chair and placed both hands on her
shoulders. Her wool sweater warmed his hands that only a moment before had been cold on his
steering wheel. There was no reason to tell Sue about the girl’s bloated body, how she floated for
so long alone in the water until he found her. There was no reason to upset her. “What a
Halloween,” he said as he pulled out a chair and sat beside her at the table. “Have we gotten any
trick-or-treaters yet?”
“I put out a bowl of candy on the steps, I hope they take only a few each.” She smiled
and put her magazine down to face him fully. “I remember when I was a girl, I used to take a
handful of whatever I pleased.”
“Well, they’ll take what they take I suppose. Is Thala all set for Thanksgiving?”
“She’s coming up with Quinn on the twenty second. Ian won’t be joining us this year,
apparently he has to work on a show in Washington D.C. that runs through the holiday weekend.
He’s been working awfully hard this year.”
Ian Hutchinson married their daughter two years after she graduated from her masters
program in education. He was a lighting engineer from Scranton, Pennsylvania. Their son,
Quinn, was turning three that winter.
“Shall I heat up some bread for our soup?” he proposed. She didn’t object, who could
to warm bread with butternut squash soup?
He served the steaming bowls and sat across from her. The candle glowed gold
between them.
~
The frost bitten leaves crunched beneath her mud caked boots. She was wandering
around the forest trying to find the edge of the water when she saw something glimmer against

	  

	   	  
	  
19	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
the bark of the hardwoods. She looked towards the water and back again. She couldn’t help but
feel drawn to the only thing that offered brightness on such a night. A deep breath led her
towards the indefinable object.
The closer she wandered the more she could make out the roundness of a head and the
straight lines of limbs. The moonless sky did not keep branches from striking her face. Each step
she took thorny brambles attacked her legs, but she did not bother to reach down to detach them
from her pant leg. Soon she was running. Her feet lifted off the ground and her jeans tore from
the sharp grabbing thorns.
It was a body. A girl’s body. Oh good God, it was a dead girl lying in the middle of the
woods close to the water, but far enough away to have been left undiscovered for quite some
time. The body was shriveled in some places but overall it was a disgusting bubble of bloated
flesh. Her eyes were missing and she was lying on the ground in a fetal position.
She felt her vocal cords dying inside her, a scream was blocking her from breathing,
but when she opened her mouth no sound came out, she had no breath. She was strangled from
the sight. The proximity to death brought her to her senses quickly. The smell was unbearably
sharp, a pungent scent of rotting insides and putrefying flesh, the black rot of a once living being.
She tried to scream, but her lungs would not comply. Panic filled her. She looked
around to see any hint of a flashlight or a passing boat, something or someone who could help
her. She looked from right to left as quickly as she could so as not to miss anything. But
something filled the space in between her and the trees, in between everything that existed in that
moment in time. A thick cloud of fog quickly blanketed the forest. Whiteness surrounded her and
nothing was visible beyond the reach of her own hands. She sunk down on her hands and knees.
Her weight on all fours gave out. Her chest fell to the ground. She rolled onto her side and curled

	  

	   	  
	  
20	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
up into the exact position the girl lying beside her was in. They seemed to be shrinking into two
tiny fetuses, one dead and one alive. The fog was swallowing them. Finally she screamed.
Sue woke up. Tears streamed down her face. Her long cotton nightgown was spiraled
into a tight twist around her body. She gasped for breath and felt her chest rise and fall.
Richard slept silently beside her lost in his own nightmare.

Part Two
It was another case of the pains of a growing teenager. The only meat her family could
afford was the marked down Spielman Specialty meats. They usually bought it a day or two
before it went past the expiration date. Her two older brothers ate like wolves and she could pack
a couple of pounds down a week at least. She was a freshman in high school and her body was
beginning to even out with her breasts. The more height she added the more her heavy torso
looked balanced in comparison to the changes puberty had brought on.
She started her period the summer after she turned twelve. She was visiting her cousins
on her mother’s side of the family for an afternoon of fun in the sun. Sun burnt all over and
annoyed to the max from the screams coming from her little cousins each time they jumped into
the swimming pond, she found herself sitting on the toilet, head in hands, listening to the air
conditioning unit rumble over her. When she pulled down her pants, there was a brown paste on
her underwear. It was not a thick clump of a mess, she would have known if she had soiled
herself; it was a thin layer of discharge that didn’t smell or have much of a texture. She placed a
few sheets of toilet paper in her panties until she could change them when she got home. She
hadn’t felt much like swimming that day anyway.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

21	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Four years later, she had grown accustomed to the monthly time when she would have
to sneak the trips to the local drug store for over the counter painkillers and feminine products.
Her two older brothers knew she was a girl, meaning there was something different down there,
but past that they had no idea or didn’t really want to have any idea what a woman had to do to
take care of herself during her time of the month.
She needed meat to keep her healthy. She went to class at eight thirty every morning,
five days a week and she worked nights at Wendy’s near the interstate to get enough money to
chip into her schoolbooks and clothes, occasionally buying herself an exciting new dress for a
party. Sometimes her family needed help with the bills here and there, and she knew without her
job, they probably wouldn’t get by some months. Their landlord was a wealthy woman from old
Cincinnati blood. She was a sore thumb at times and when they didn’t pay their rent on time she
would cut off their electricity or heat.
She had recently developed a crush on a boy in her class. She had known him since
sixth grade, but had only really started to notice him lately. They had geometry together and in
the afternoons she always watched him walk towards the big oak tree on the side of the road
behind the gym to meet his mom or dad or whoever was picking him up. She overheard him
talking one day about getting a motorcycle to ride to school and take trips on. She fantasized
about holding onto his skinny waist while the wind rushed through her hair. They would skip
their last class to go sit near a waterfall or have a picnic in a meadow on the outskirts of the city.
She liked the way his hair fell into his eyes and the way he said hi to her, quiet and shy, but when
she could see his smile, her whole body felt weak with an urge to grab his hand or pull him into
her.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

22	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The pains began to bother her one night when she was closing. It was around midnight.
Her shift didn’t end until two that morning. It was a Friday night and she knew she could sleep in
the next day. She was standing at the register when an extreme pain caused her to double over.
Her friend Todd saw her and seemed concerned, but the more she tried to ignore the pain, the
more it started to bother her. It wasn’t until the next afternoon that her mother called the
ambulance. Her father watched from the porch as the EMS team loaded her into the square
vehicle. She knew he was worried about the hospital bills. Her mother begged him for what
seemed like hours to let her call 911. It had turned into a scene and the sooner she was out of the
house the better. She didn’t care where she was going just as long as she got away from her
mother’s crying. It was making the pain in her abdomen worse.
After two days in the hospital the test results from the MRI came back. The doctor told
her in two brief sentences that she had developed stomach cancer and a tumor that needed to be
removed as soon they could schedule it with the OR. They took her into surgery the next day.
She woke up with her brothers asleep in the chairs beside her bed and her mother rocking back
and forth on the floor with her knees clutched close to her body. Her eyes were blood shot and
tired. A fake smile appeared on her mother’s lips when she saw that she was awake. She sensed
in the air that her father had been there and had left a trail of upset behind him.
In another couple of days she would be out of the hospital depending on how well her
body adjusted to the surgery. The doctors came and updated her once a day on her levels of
rehabilitation and the therapy that may or may not be needed. Another couple of days turned into
a couple of weeks and soon she was beginning to feel her life was slowly flushing down the
toilet along with the hospital food she was throwing up daily.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

23	  	  	  	  	  
	  

We’ve entered you into a treatment center. The nurse told her one afternoon. You’re a
perfect candidate and lucky to have been accepted. It was her only choice. Her mother was
smiling, her father was stone cold and silent and her brothers had no idea where they were
sending their sister. All they heard was New Brunswick, somewhere in Canada, a center that was
being funded by the Department of Health. Her case was sensitive enough to peak the interests of
the researchers and hopefully she would be cured within six months to a year.
She wrote a letter to the boy who may or may not have bought his motorbike. She told
one of her brothers to leave it in his locker. She knew he would check it after lunch before he had
to get his books for class. It said something along the lines of: I’ve always loved you but I never
had the courage to tell you. I hope we can hang out when I get out of the hospital. I notice the
way you use your ruler and can tell from how you answer questions in class that you are really
smart. I know we would learn a lot from each other. If you want to write, send a letter to the
Collective Center for Cancer Research. I will write to you from there and you’ll have the return
address. Until then.
They attached her to a portable saline source and drove her to the airport. She had only
been in a plane twice before. Once to visit her dying grandfather in Arizona and another time to
go to Disneyworld in Florida when she was about eight years old.
The plane took off. She couldn’t tell whether it was her medication that made her feel
drowsy or the tilt of the metal winged plane against the pressure of the atmosphere. She fell
asleep within minutes. The city lights blurred below her and fireworks exploded behind her
darkly fallen eyelids.
~

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

24	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The treatment center was a busy place, much busier than the hospital she had spent a
month in. Her days were jam packed with sessions. She would go from a fifty-minute session
with a psychologist to a specialist who talked with her about what they were treating specifically
inside her. Then she would spend hours in a treatment room where they hooked her up to
machines and listened to the inner workings of her body. She went through surgery a couple of
times but they were tiny surgeries compared to her first and practically painless.
Her room overlooked the rocky seaside and she fell asleep to the sound of the waves
crashing against the shore. She felt at peace.
The library was full of books she had never seen or heard of, and she didn’t have to
worry about completing her mundane school assignments anymore. She was reading and talking
to interesting people. She made friends with the other patients. They were from all over the
world, and despite the language barriers, she enjoyed the company of such vastly different
people than her.
She loved sitting outside in the sunshine. The days lasted longer than at home. She had
never experienced so much daylight. Her body began to feel lighter and better except for a few
spells of utter fatigue and numbness from all the medication she was taking.
She sent a letter the boy and was waiting for a response. Her mother wrote to her but her
writing was in a scribble she couldn’t read. Once a week she would call home and talk long
enough to feel thankful that she wasn’t there anymore. She was in another part of the world, far
away from Spielmans Specialty meats, Wendy’s, and the harsh ordeals of high school.
At night she would dream her body was full of white balloons to float her up into the
sky and carry her to the boy’s doorstep. She would land softly on the green grass in front of his
house. He would see her standing outside, recognize her, and open the door. Standing face to

	  

	   	  
	  
25	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
face he would slowly raise his hand to her cheek. Their embrace would be long and tender with
kisses landing on the eyebrows and cheeks until finally their lips would meet. The softness of his
tongue and sweet taste of saliva would last for hours until the morning light reminded her of
another day.
~
One afternoon she went for a walk and found a boy around her age sitting in a wheel
chair near the edge of the cliffs. He noticed her approach and turned his head immediately away.
He was upset. That much she could tell. She said nothing but quietly stood next to him and took
in the view of what seemed like an endless ocean stretching far into the nowhere.
His legs and lower torso were wrapped in some type of wire. She wondered how he
went to the bathroom. After a few moments of silence, she looked at him and smiled. He looked
down to where his body was aching and then up again to her. The slight smile she gave him
brightened his entire demeanor. He told her he was thinking about rolling off. He spoke English
with a harsh accent. He sounded like he was from the Eastern Europe or Russia. She replied that
his family would miss him and probably wonder where their son or brother had gone. She also
told him that there were many people at the center that probably cared for him. Life would get
better for him once he healed.
People jump all the time, he said. Sometimes the bodies are found; sometimes they just
drift in the ocean forever becoming a part of it. Better to be a part of something as beautiful as
this than as ugly as this. He looked down to where his legs used to be.
Amazing things are happening all the time, whether we can see them or not. She tried to
tell him that miracles were going on inside his body that would take time but would eventually
heal him and take him home.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

26	  	  	  	  	  
	  

He didn’t want to go home, he said. He wanted to go somewhere else, somewhere where
he wouldn’t feel the ghosts of his legs, somewhere where he would understand why his bones
were growing back but were being programmed to move with the synapses in his brain. There
were complications that would never be solved, and he didn’t want to be the one to have to wait
it through. He didn’t want to be the one to test it out. Maybe he was supposed to have died in the
accident but he was being kept alive for modern technological advancements. It had been five
years and some man’s ego was attached to his survival. He didn’t want to live so some doctor
could boost his medical reputation.
There was a movie playing and she wanted to watch it with him. He agreed and they
backtracked along the trail together. They ate banana pudding and watched the movie.
Afterwards they talked and watched the sunset sparkle on the horizon.
~
For the next couple of days she walked along side the boy in the wheelchair, sharing her
experiences, and tying all her memories together for him so her life made sense. He did the same,
but his life was vastly different from hers. He was from a city called Minsk in a country called
Belarus. She didn’t know if this country was a part of Germany or Poland so she looked in an
atlas in the library one evening. It was east of Poland and north of Ukraine, a part of the world
she had never really thought about.
He told her stories about his childhood when he lived alone with his mother. She was an
actress who was in her fifth role at the Maxim Gorky Theatre. They lived by the old Kalvaryja
cemetery. Every day he would run through it to get to school on time in the morning. One day
he came home and discovered to his discontent that his mother had brought a man home with
her, not a cast member or a director, but a man who claimed to be a producer for a new theatre

	  

	   	  
	  
27	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
that was to open that spring. He wanted her to be one of his main actors. His first production was
going to be A Winter’s Tale. He told his mother he wanted her for the role of Queen Hermione.
She would beg Leontes to love her and believe in her. He wanted her to be painted in white when
she transformed from a marble statue into a mother waiting to be reunited with her daughter.
One night his mother did not return. Three days passed with no word until he received an
urgent message to meet her at a train station in a town he had never heard of. The producer had
stolen all her money and left her.
Then the accident happened. He stopped there.
She held back the urge to ask what happened. She liked listening to his raspy accent and
the way his English slipped in and out of recognizable words. When he spoke words she had
known forever, his accent made them sound like she was hearing them for the first time. His ‘h’
sounds had a harsh edge to them. A ‘ua’ sounded more like a ‘w’. His long and short ‘o’ sounds
were much too long or too short so he said words like bowl and orange in a way that made her
smile. Sometimes he forgot to say ‘the’ or ‘a’ before a word. At first she smiled outwardly each
time he made the mistake but he did it so often she started to get used to it.
His sentences were direct and to the point. She liked that.
She was beginning to forget about the boy who used to wait under the oak tree. She no
longer missed the way his jeans sagged or the square outline in his back pocket where his wallet
had worn through the denim. His entire persona was fading from her memory.
One afternoon of a nurse showed her a scan of her stomach on a monitor. It looked more
like silly putty than blood and cells.
~

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

28	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The doctors at the center collectively called her into a board meeting one sunny April
morning. She sat down across from them in a wooden chair made for what seemed like a giant.
Her feet barely touched the ground. She looked up and recognized each pair of eyes staring at
her. She knew all the doctors, some better than others. They smiled and she looked back at them
like a newborn babe does to her guardian angels gathered around to welcome the newly arrived
into the world.
They were silent for a couple of minutes, longer than was comfortable for her. The doctor
in the middle of the table was the first to speak. She was the director who had welcomed her day
she arrived. The woman was in her late forties, with long chestnut hair, and green eyes. She was
British and spoke slowly, almost as if she was speaking to a toddler.
She said the treatment plan was going slower than they had hoped and they weren’t sure
her life could be saved. They were doing all they could and would continue to do so but without
the activity in her cells taking direction she may not survive the treatment.
They wanted her to know just in case she had any wishes to see her family. The director
said there was a chance life may leave her at any moment.
She realized they wanted her to talk or do or say something, after all, they were gathered
in the same room at once for a reason. She had no air for a second until the silence in the room
made her shiver. She said she did not want to see her family. She wanted to wait. If she died she
was prepared to die. If she lived she would live with what course her body chose.
All the doctors smiled in unison and stood up. She stood up in response and shook a hand
or hugged each doctor in turns of them leaving the room in different directions. The room had
various doors that led to the different wings of the center. They called it the Hive. Once all the

	  

	   	  
	  
29	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
doctors had emptied out she was standing alone. The white and yellow walls calmed her. The
breeze was blowing through the window and suddenly she had an urge to walk to the shore.
She tried to find her friend but he was nowhere in sight. She scanned all the usual places
he normally spent time in, but to no avail did she find him reading or drawing a cartoon character
with verbal bubbles popping out of their funny shaped mouths.
She decided to go to the shoreline anyway. The sun was setting by the minute and she
didn’t want to miss her favorite moment.
While she walked along the stone path she knew so intimately, she began to think about all
the moments she would miss in her life if she died. Life flashed before her like a movie preview.
If she was going to die, she wanted to die quickly; she was walking in a different gait now,
a kind of run with a hop every now and then. She was running faster than she ever thought she
could, she felt like she was flying. The sound of her feet was barely audible as they touched
ground. She was lifting ever so slightly.
She ran faster and faster until she saw the edge of the shore. It was at least a forty-foot fall
into the water and the bottom was rocky and jagged. She knew and understood if she did not stop
she would fall…or fly. There was a thought in her head that she might not fall. She could just
float and land in the water; after all she had never swum in this ocean for as long as she had been
there.
Her feet lifted off the ground. She was flying. She knew she was flying. She did not stop.
The wind carried her out and over the edge of the shore. She flew over the water and grazed it
with her fingertips. The water reacted by spreading like sparkles underneath her. She lifted her
chest and flew in spirals around the clouds, high, and low, and back down towards the shore
stopping just before she reached land. She didn’t want to get sucked back into the force of

	  

	   	  
	  
30	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
gravity quite yet. She raised her head and chest and glided through the sky. She wanted to reach
the outer rim of the planet. She flew past earth and circled the moon and all around the earth,
flying back into the stratosphere, visiting any country she wanted to see. Then back out again to
breath the air of the solar system. She soared in and out of countries visiting islands off Japan
and the Himalayas and back down again to Madagascar. She headed for Mars and onto the
moons around Jupiter. She caught the Milky Way and slid down it like a three year old at a
playground. She was happy beyond happiness, joyful beyond recognition, and free beyond the
limits of a human body.

Part Three
Sue woke up. Her head was heavy. She turned to where Richard had slept but he was
already up. His warmth was gone from the sheets and a chill spread through her outstretched
arm. She threw a shawl over her shoulders and made her way to the bathroom to brush her teeth
and wash her face. The water was taking a while to warm up. As she looked into the mirror she
remembered the face without eyes. Her nightmare came back to her in quick flashes. The fetal
position, the scream, the feeling of the fog pushing the life out of her.
With a rosy complexion about her face, she rushed down the stairs and saw Richard
walking down the driveway with the paper resting in his arms like a fresh loaf of bread. She
made a cup of tea and sat down in a reading chair to think about the images still sharp in her
mind.
Richard walked slowly back to the house. After refilling his coffee cup, he sat down on the
couch with a grunt trying not to spill. Sue was sipping her tea, lost in the herbs on the bottom of
her mug. He watched her for a few seconds waiting for her to look up.
	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

31	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“I need to reorganize the section on dreams in the store. Remember when I used to read all
those dream analysts? Carl Jung and Carlos Castaneda,” she was looking straight at him, with an
excited quiver in her pupils, “I wonder if we have those lying around.”
He didn’t say much for a few minutes. He thought about his dreams, but all he could
remember was darkness and indiscernible figures, people with visible bodies but hindered
features.
“I dreamt last night of a drowned girl,” Sue whispered as if she were saying her nighttime
prayers. “She was puffy and had no eyes.” A burst of laughter caused pent up tears to break free,
“I am a bit shaken up I guess.”
Richard put down his mug and grabbed a pillow from behind him. He threw it on the
ground to kneel at the base of her chair. She looked at him and blinked. The tears fell into her
lap. He reached around her and rested his head against her chest. The embrace reminded him of
the two miscarriages Sue endured before Thala was born. He used to hold her like this when she
would break down and cry in this very chair. It turned out the third time worked like a charm.
“You are right my love,” he looked up at her, “the call yesterday—when I went to meet
Charlie—” he said slowly. She nodded. “It was about a body they found near Curtis Island, a
girl, eighteen. When I saw her, her eyes had been eaten out, and the salt water had infiltrated
every pore of her body.”
Sue dropped her mug. The tea spilled onto the rug and out onto the hardwood floor. The
tinted water crept ever so slowly away from them before disappearing into a crack in the floor.
~

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

32	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The phone rang a couple days before Thanksgiving. It was Charlie calling to tell the
Admiral he was leaving town and had not heard anything new concerning the details of the girl’s
case.
“Drowned, that’s it, no suicide, homicide or pesticide,” Charlie’s bland humor needed
some spice, “I’ll call you if anything comes up,” he said before he hung up.
Richard had an inclination to open a completely new file on all these cases. They should
all be considered one case, he grunted to himself as he walked through the aisles of the grocery
store gathering things in his cart that Sue had put on the list for him. Kosher salt to brine the
turkey, heavy whipping cream for the pumpkin pie, wow was he getting hungry. He was excited
to see Thala and Quinn, whom he had not seen in a whole year. He was always fascinated with
the differences between mother and son. He remembered her when she was Quinn’s age, playing
with her dolls and pretending she was an escaped zoo animal in the back yard. Sue would bring
her a bowl of milk and she would try to lick it up pretending she was a cougar or jaguar. Last
time he saw Quinn he was picking up sticks and pebbles and hitting everything in sight.
~
Thala arrived that afternoon. She had cut her hair short and when she turned her head
quickly towards where Richard was standing its shimmering blackness resembled that of a
flapper girl from the twenties. Two skinny locks curled into sharp ringlets in front of her ears and
close to her jaw. Her smile was still as wide as ever, and the dimple on her left cheek that
appeared when she smiled was still Richard’s favorite place to kiss her.
She pulled into the driveway with Quinn asleep in his car seat. His little hands were limp
in his lap and his shoes had been kicked off. One of his socks hung onto the edge of his toes.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

33	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Richard brought their suitcases upstairs while Thala used the bathroom. Sue was working
in the bookstore ready to flip the open sign when the clock struck five. Thanksgiving was the
next day. Sue was excited about catching up with Thala while Quinn played with the wooden
train set she had kept for him for all these years.
Thala came out of the bathroom and pulled her hairbrush out of the bag on her bed. Midstroke, she noticed the door to her father’s study was shut. Wondering if Ruby was stuck inside
the stuffy room, she stood in front of the door listening for a distressed meow. She began to turn
the knob when she heard a cry from Quinn who had woken up from his nap and was still
strapped into his car seat. She flew down the stairs and saw Richard attempting to unstrap him.
She knew it had been more than a year since they had seen each other and was curious if Quinn
would react differently to his grandfather after that long of a separation.
Richard was having a difficult time figuring out the logistics of the seat belt. Quinn was
staring up at him with sleepy eyes.
“Do you remember Grandpa?” Thala spouted loudly as she reached in the back seat to
unclick the seat belt. Quinn stood there looking around in both directions, rubbing his eyes, still
half asleep.
“Quinn?” Thala said gently.
“Yes, hello Granpa how’s the books?” Quinn spoke with daunting precision. Last year his
only words compromised of those that covered what he wanted, simple one phrase lingos that
Thala understood the best. Sue and Richard had a hard time guessing what he was saying, but
now he was clearly speaking English, not his own form of baby gibberish. Richard marveled at
Quinn and how much he had grown and felt proud all of a sudden.
~

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

34	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The setting sun cast light on the brick building and windows with a magenta colored
wand. They played with a soft bouncy ball until Sue closed the store and came running out the
back door. She had tears in her eyes when she pulled away from Thala to run her hands around
the precious frame of her face and through her hair. Quinn stopped playing and stood in front of
her.
“My little Quinn!” Sue leaned down towards him. He wrapped his arms as well as he could
around her knees. Sue kissed him on the head and kneeled down to look at him closely. “My,
my, we have a little man in our family now.” She nuzzled his nose with hers and reached for the
crook in Richard’s arm to stand up. “I made a tuna casserole for tonight, it used to be your
mama’s favorite dish.”
“Tuna from the ocean?” Quinn looked to his mother for an answer.
“That’s right bub, tuna from the ocean! I love fresh tuna and Gramee’s casserole is the best
I’ve ever had,” she whispered loudly, “even Daddy thinks so.” Sue heard her and smiled.
“Do all fish come from the ocean?” Quinn asked.
“No, some come from rivers and lakes too.” Richard answered with his booming voice that
could easily scare a child at first. “There are some kinds of fish that can only live in fresh water
as opposed to salt water.” An image of the bloated body flashed into his open eyes like lighting
from a storm in his frontal lobe, he stopped talking for a second and had to remember what he
was saying. “Yes, trout and bass are good examples.”
“Come on old man,” Thala joked as she held the door open for him, “I brought a few
bottles of wine. Lets open one to celebrate.”
While Quinn took a dive into the toys that were spread out for him in the open living room,
Sue turned the oven on low to heat up their supper. The three of them sat down to catch up. Sue

	  

	   	  
	  
35	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
inquired about Thala’s teaching position and whether or not she felt like she had enough time to
spend with Quinn. Thala was working over time and not being paid for her hours and their house
was falling apart because their landlord didn’t believe in treating tenants like real people (their
bedroom ceiling had collapsed and the landlord replied by telling them to shut the door and move
into another room). Ian was always working late on shows and talking about how he could make
more money if he was on the road. They were struggling with their differing opinions on how to
raise Quinn but for the most part they agreed on the essential decisions. Ian wanted another
child, and so did Thala, but not until they were a little more financially stable. Thala was turning
thirty soon after Quinn turned three so they could wait until he was a little older, that way she
wouldn’t have two babies in a car seats, a nightmare she was told from other mothers. It was
always easier when one child was old enough to help look after the younger.
“We could be a modern nomadic family, Quinn will grow his hair out long, and he’ll have
his brother or sister dangling off one of his hips. Ian will do the lighting for shows around the
world and I will make all our clothes and take their education into my own hands. They will be
allowed to skip all the standardized testing they make kids go through these days. It’ll be perfect!
They will grow up around the world, speaking different languages, meeting all kinds of people.”
Richard and Sue were both listening intently but once Thala realized what she was saying
she laughed out loud and ran over to where Quinn was playing. She flopped down on the floor
and grabbed him by to hang him in the air above her. He giggled uncontrollably. “What do you
think bubs? Should we travel around with Daddy and go see all the places he gets to see?” Quinn
nodded his head. “Ok.” She lowered him down. His head rested gently on her chest for a moment
before he pushed himself up and jumped off her and back into the game he had been playing
before her rambunctious interruption.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

36	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Thala sat back down with her parents. Their faces looked older and more tired all of a
sudden. “I am going to quit my job.” They both looked shocked. “Just for now, just to get things
going a little faster in our lives, Ian and I have already talked about it and we think it’s the only
solution right now. He makes more money in a weekend than I make in a month. And I do want
another child. We have the opportunity to travel and not a lot of people do in this economy. I
want to see things before I get too old.”
Sue reached for Richard’s hand and he responded right away. They held hands silently for
a couple of seconds before Richard spoke.
“Thala, when will we see you?” His eyes were as sad as his voice. “Your mother and I
love you dearly, and we want you to be happy, so yes, go, travel, live around the world while you
are young, and then come back.” He patted her on the thigh and smiled trying to wipe away his
sadness.
“Yes, my darling girl. Go. Follow your heart. You have always been good at that, and what
a blessing it has done for you. You have our support. You have our love my sweet child.”
Thala began to cry, not a wailing cry but silent sobs, her deep unsteady breath kept tears
from falling. Richard and Sue collectively moved to sit by her and each put a gentle arm or hand
somewhere on her shaking body. Quinn saw what was happening and walked slowly towards his
mother. He noticed they weren’t saying anything to her to make her stop crying. He found his
place in the triangle of mother and grandparents and put his hands on top of the cluster of
interlocked fingers. On top of that he rested his forehead in an effort to give his mother air to
breath.
~

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

37	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Turkey day arrived at long last. Richard’s appetite had been teased and tested as Sue called
him downstairs to sample the gravy and stuffing and smell the baking pumpkin and pecan pies,
but not eat, oh no. He had to skip lunch to wait to eat around four o’clock. By that time he was
both cranky and hungry, not really appreciative of all the cooking Thala and Sue had done, and
how they put him directly to carving the turkey right after they gave their thanks. Quinn was
sitting in his high chair with sweet potatoes and green bean casserole already stuffed in his
mouth, a smile spread across his lips to top it off, not to mention food all over his face and bib.
As Richard peeled the breast meat off layer-by-layer, Sue and Thala munched on a spinach salad
to start off their long afternoon of feasting. He slipped a piece of steaming meat in his mouth
and savored the energy it gave him. Just after he swallowed, the phone rang loud compared to
the munching mandibles of the family. He looked at Thala and Sue and Quinn and knew that
because he standing, he was the one who would answer the damn phone.
It was Charlie. Calling on a holiday, as usual. Richard joked about what kind of news he
would hear once Christmas rolled around. Charlie chuckled lightly before he cut to the chase
surrounding the information he had heard from F.B.I headquarters in Boston. They too had found
a couple of bodies with similar genetic mutations. It was nothing new. They had found their first
body five years ago.
After Charlie released his files to headquarters, they informed him some of their victims
still wore wristbands with patient ID numbers. The thick letters GH&VH was the common
denominator and told them right away where the bodies were coming from. Investigations into
the Department of Health were ordered and rumors spread threatening to leak information to the
media. Charlie knew that once these cases were solved the truth would be groundbreaking but
had no idea it was already old news.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

38	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The mystery of GH&VH was finally revealed to Charlie. It stood for Give Health and
Vital Healing and had sprouted off of a larger center for spirituality. The center for health and
healing was founded in the late seventies but over the past decade had transformed into a center
where medical experiments were being carried out completely under the table. The major
funding for the center was from private donors; millionaires and billionaires, your favorite aging
movie star and the white collar Wall Street banker were backing the research for their own
benefit, hoping they would someday have the technology to make any ailment, or any life
threatening sickness, curable. They wanted to live forever, to defy the law of death, the chance to
be at the height of their species, at the forefront of civilization.
The families of the victims had all known their loved one was sent to a treatment center
but had no idea of its whereabouts. In fact, some families had never even been informed that
their loved one had died. Some still believed they were being treated. You can imagine the shock
when told the person had been dead for years. The victims all had one thing in common; they
were all on the verge of death, sent to the center because their bodies were in a condition of no
hope, fragile and very sensitive.
“Richard, the turkey is getting cold,” Sue hollered from the dining room.
He told Charlie to wrap it up. The final thing he told Richard was that his father had
recently undergone heart surgery and had been told that if he had had the time, if his heart had
been a little stronger, he could have waited a couple of years for a newer technology that would
guarantee his heart to have everlasting health. Not a guarantee that some other system in his
body wouldn’t fail, but an absolute promise that he would not face heart failure.
“It’s these types of technologies that are being researched at this center Admiral, I am not
sure they are murdering people there.”

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

39	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“We can never be certain of anything in this world. Have a good time down there and give
me a ring when you get back into town.”
“One more thing sir—I am going to visit the center. I’ll give you all the details when I
return.” And that was that, Richard went back to slicing the meat off the steaming turkey carcass.
~
It was March, the holidays and the new year had come and passed, jingle bells and sleighs
and all the jazz of the season had left Richard more tired than he had ever felt before, not to
mention the coldest months of the winter had made his bones stiff and his jaw tight. The ground
was thawing and spring’s delights were just around the corner. Ships in the harbor still slept
underneath blankets of protective layers. Their masts were disassembled and the galleys were
locked up with thick planks of wood.
After Charlie reported all the details concerning the treatment center, the unsolved files
were shut and labeled suicides. There was nothing more to do. The funding would continue and
the medical breakthroughs would hopefully thrive.
Sue’s birthday was coming up and two days after was their anniversary. For thirty-eight
years they had shared everything, a bed, bottles of wine, friends had come and gone in both of
their lives, but out of all the translucent and impermanent details which falter in and out of a
lifetime, the great pillars of their marriage had kept them both sturdy; they had succeeded in
what one could call the joining of two lives. And it was every year after his wife’s birthday, and
their anniversary, that Richard felt the weight of time.
Time, an idea in and of itself, and just as ambiguous as the answers to lifelong questions,
had suddenly began to weigh heavy upon his psyche.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

40	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Thala and Ian had placed all their belongings in storage and were now touring China and
Japan, a part of the world Richard had always been eager to see, but never had the motive to
make the actual journey. The new weight he felt was making him restless, he wanted to start
something new, the ground was still too hard to plant the garden, and his clock building failed to
supply the rush of excitement it used to give him. He wanted to be out on the ocean. Wanted to
tack with the wind. Wanted to feel his pipe between his teeth and the helm at his hands.
Sue had seen this in him before. She proposed they take a trip as soon as the marina
opened again. They had two weeks to plan and just enough savings to buy supplies for a journey
down the coast as far as they pleased. Sue was thinking the Outer Banks off the coast of North
Carolina, Richard was thinking a little farther and wilder, such as Cuba or Jamaica, somewhere
where the weather was hot and the fruit ripe. However far they decided to go, they were going,
and that was that.
A couple of days before they set sail, Sue was running around packing her journals and
books that she wanted to read. Meanwhile, Richard spiced up the boat, replaced all the light
bulbs and installed a brand new refrigerator, something he had been meaning to do for the past
couple of years. Just as he pulled into the driveway, back from his last run to the hardware store,
a sharp pain shot up his left side and splintered into his chest. It only lasted for a few seconds,
but afterwards, he was out of breath and shocked. He closed both his eyelids separately just to
make sure he still had his motor functions. He moved his shoulder in the socket and squeezed his
bicep to feel if he was sensitive to the touch. All was normal; he must have just been feeling
charged from all the movement his body had been through in the past weeks. He could see Sue
running around frantically throwing things into the suitcase she had sprawled in the middle of the

	  

	   	  
	  
41	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
living room before he left. She had always been an ample traveler, a fast packer, generally ready
for adventures no matter how short notice they were.
For the first couple years of their relationship, before they were married, they traveled
together almost every other weekend, north to Nova Scotia, and south to Boston and New York
City exploring state parks and historical places, staying with family and friends and camping in
the warmer months. Fishing and kayaking were some of their favorite things to do before
Richard purchased their 32-footer and set her sails. The sloop soon became their home away
from home and felt just as comfortable as the two-story brick house they had made together
ashore.
They loaded everything into the car. Ruby sat on top of her litter box in the front seat
curious to see what all the fuss had been over. When the car jolted forward, full of all their stuff,
Ruby looked back and forth between the house and the road as if she couldn’t make up her mind
as to where she wished she was.
They arrived at the harbor. Husband, wife and cat boarded the boat, now packed with
fresh food and all the personal belongings they desired. It was two o’clock in the afternoon and
the wind was blowing in from the Northeast at a desirable nine miles per hour. The sky had a few
clouds, but a happy go lucky blue drowned the white speckles of clouds.
Sue pulled in the fenders as they motored their way out of the harbor, silently saying their
goodbyes to Camden. There was no view as astounding as the one from the water. Camden’s
waterfalls and meandering streams made the town seem like a fabrication of a lost boy’s
imagination, enough space to feel free, but just enough knots in the tightrope of society to keep
the roots and vines from taking over.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

42	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Their first day went smoothly and the sunrise of their second day out at sea was the color
of summer peaches. They were making good time and felt satisfied being away from the coast
they knew so well.
“She needed to stretch her sails just as much as we needed to get some fresh air,” Richard
hollered to Sue as he sat at the tiller guiding the wind vein to keep their course straight. She was
at the bow enjoying the sunlight, nonchalantly scribbling down her thoughts in her journal. Ruby
was down in the cabin satisfactorily grooming her calico coat on their bed in the v-birth.
Everything was calm.
If I could choose, today would be a perfect day to die, Richard thought to himself.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

43	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The Sapling
~Bedtime~
“The	  splendid	  fragmented	  willows	  make	  the	  yew	  tide	  glow,”	  he	  read	  as	  he	  was	  trying	  
to	  fall	  asleep,	  but	  for	  good	  reasons	  he	  could	  not	  remove	  his	  mind	  from	  the	  gripping	  
memory	  of	  her	  ivory	  skin.	  This	  made	  the	  little	  boy	  itch	  with	  so	  much	  pleasure	  he	  could	  not	  
look	  at	  how	  his	  mother	  poured	  milk	  in	  ever	  the	  same	  way.	  She	  would	  lean	  over	  and	  her	  
breasts	  would	  tilt	  ever	  so	  swiftly	  towards	  the	  floor.	  	  She	  would	  bend	  and	  he	  would	  bend	  
and	  together	  they	  would	  watch	  the	  white	  liquid	  arabesque	  down	  onto	  the	  sleeping	  cereal,	  
now	  tucked	  beneath	  a	  blanket	  of	  the	  freshest	  milk.	  	  

~Sugar~	  
You	  don’t	  always	  have	  to	  put	  sugar	  in	  your	  tea,	  the	  eyes	  of	  an	  old	  woman	  said	  as	  she	  
peered	  down	  at	  him	  from	  behind	  the	  green	  tinged	  counter.	  His	  mother	  sat	  in	  the	  back	  of	  the	  
salon	  awaiting	  her	  weekly	  color	  touch	  up	  as	  well	  as	  the	  compliment	  from	  the	  stylist	  who	  
would	  tell	  her	  she	  was	  the	  prettiest	  woman	  on	  their	  block	  under	  the	  age	  of	  ruin.	  The	  
women	  younger	  than	  this	  elusive	  cut	  off	  line	  were	  all	  downtown	  working	  as	  secretaries	  for	  
the	  married	  lawyers	  and	  bankers	  patiently	  awaiting	  the	  day	  when	  the	  men	  would	  grace	  
their	  fingers	  with	  theirs	  as	  the	  daily	  coffee	  was	  given	  hour	  after	  hour,	  meeting	  after	  
meeting,	  until	  finally	  her	  boss’s	  finger	  would	  slide	  down	  from	  the	  skin	  above	  her	  knuckles	  
down	  onto	  the	  smoothness	  of	  her	  polished	  nails.	  She	  would	  take	  notice	  first,	  then	  he	  would	  
until	  four	  eyes	  locked	  in	  a	  dreamy	  contractual	  commitment.	  He	  would	  budge	  from	  the	  
sudden	  intimacy	  only	  to	  ring	  his	  CEO	  to	  tell	  him	  to	  make	  the	  final	  deposit	  into	  his	  IRA	  and	  
	  

	   	  
	  
44	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
inform	  him	  of	  his	  two-­‐week	  notice—of	  course	  office	  lingo	  does	  not	  allow	  for	  such	  a	  fantasy	  
to	  really	  come	  true,	  but	  it	  doesn’t	  hurt	  to	  dream	  such	  a	  dream.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
The	  little	  boy	  picked	  up	  the	  silver	  spoon	  and	  sank	  it	  deep	  into	  the	  white	  sparkling	  
sugar.	  One,	  two,	  three	  spoon	  fulls	  of	  heaping	  treasure	  were	  dumped	  into	  the	  now	  dark	  
imported	  English	  Breakfast	  tea.	  He	  liked	  watching	  it	  disappear	  into	  the	  murky	  water	  and	  
marveled	  at	  how	  such	  a	  magical	  grain	  could	  disappear	  so	  completely.	  As	  he	  poured	  it	  into	  
his	  cup,	  he	  imagined	  angel	  wings	  must	  be	  something	  like	  falling	  sugar,	  amassed	  in	  the	  air,	  
somehow	  connected	  to	  the	  angel’s	  arms	  and	  interwoven	  in	  the	  space	  where	  the	  shoulder	  
blades	  meet	  the	  upper	  ribs	  (angels	  bones	  are	  ivory).	  He	  wondered	  how	  they	  flew	  so	  
gracefully	  without	  their	  wings	  crumbling	  underneath	  them.	  There	  must	  be	  some	  
unnamable	  force	  holding	  the	  sugar	  together,	  strong	  enough	  to	  carry	  the	  weight	  of	  their	  
bodies,	  but	  loose	  enough	  to	  allow	  the	  air	  to	  travel	  freely	  around	  each	  grain,	  offering	  
support	  from	  a	  dance	  between	  oxygen	  and	  sweetness.	  	  Perhaps	  the	  angel’s	  bodies	  are	  
weightless,	  and	  the	  sugar	  is	  merely	  attracted	  to	  their	  ephemeralness.	  It	  doesn’t	  matter	  
where	  the	  angel	  is	  at	  anytime	  because	  sugar	  will	  fly	  from	  the	  closest	  kitchen	  or	  cabinet	  or	  
bakery	  or	  pie	  shop	  or	  cane	  field	  and	  gather	  ever	  so	  gently	  along	  their	  slender	  fingers	  and	  
down	  onto	  their	  silken	  forearms	  and	  up	  their	  porcelain	  shoulders,	  blossoming	  out	  into	  the	  
perfect	  multitude	  of	  a	  wing.	  	  
“Sweetheart	  go	  and	  drink	  your	  tea	  with	  the	  other	  women,”	  his	  mother	  called	  from	  
the	  back	  of	  the	  salon.	  
“Sometimes	  he	  gets	  very	  distracted	  by	  things,”	  she	  mumbled	  to	  her	  stylist,	  “I	  just	  
wonder	  if	  it	  is	  a	  serious	  issue	  or	  not.”	  In	  a	  whisper	  she	  added,	  “dumping	  three	  spoon	  fulls	  of	  
sugar	  into	  his	  tea!	  I	  just	  hope	  his	  imagination	  is	  as	  boundless	  as	  his	  curiosity.”	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

45	  	  	  	  	  
	  

~A	  Stroll~	  
The	  color	  of	  her	  lipstick	  captured	  the	  tone	  of	  western	  sunsets	  and	  her	  yellow	  dress	  
beamed	  brightly	  but	  not	  blindingly	  as	  it	  mirrored	  the	  off	  yellow	  that	  can	  often	  be	  confused	  
with	  the	  color	  of	  bile.	  It	  was	  far	  from	  that	  hideous	  excrement	  that	  comes	  from	  the	  inner	  
tubes	  of	  the	  body,	  for	  it	  made	  her	  skin	  shine	  against	  the	  cool	  cotton	  fabric.	  Summer	  was	  
about	  her,	  which	  made	  her	  feel	  free	  and	  gave	  her	  the	  perspective	  of	  a	  newly	  hatched	  
butterfly	  free	  from	  its	  cocoon.	  	  
She	  did	  not	  walk	  in	  a	  bounce,	  she	  fluttered	  gaily	  from	  one	  store	  window	  to	  the	  next,	  
skimming	  the	  glass	  cases	  to	  see	  if	  anything	  interested	  her.	  She	  knew	  she	  could	  fly	  as	  quickly	  
into	  one	  store	  and	  out	  just	  as	  fast	  if	  she	  became	  bored	  or	  changed	  her	  mind.	  She	  was	  
attached	  to	  nothing,	  and	  her	  options	  were	  endless.	  There	  was	  no	  end	  to	  Fifth	  Avenue	  that	  
she	  could	  sense	  ahead,	  no	  policeman	  telling	  her	  the	  road	  was	  blocked	  because	  of	  this	  or	  
that—no	  children	  missing	  their	  parents,	  no	  man	  searching	  for	  his	  fiancée	  who	  had	  
disappeared	  just	  after	  the	  raiding	  had	  began,	  no	  old	  man	  claiming	  a	  neglected	  child	  had	  
stolen	  his	  watch—there	  was	  absolute	  tranquility	  and	  calm	  this	  particular	  afternoon	  and	  it	  
just	  happened	  to	  be	  the	  warmest	  Saturday	  she	  had	  experienced	  so	  far	  that	  March.	  	  
At	  her	  side	  the	  little	  boy	  trailed	  behind	  him	  a	  wooden	  train	  pulled	  by	  a	  string	  he	  had	  
taken	  from	  his	  father’s	  tool	  shed.	  He	  had	  only	  been	  inside	  the	  rusty	  tin	  roofed	  building	  a	  
couple	  of	  times,	  and	  never	  by	  himself.	  The	  hand	  that	  always	  led	  him	  was	  cold	  and	  clammy	  
with	  a	  hairy	  backside.	  The	  hair	  had	  calmed	  him	  the	  first	  time	  he	  was	  taken	  along	  on	  this	  
rare	  visit	  to	  the	  shed.	  Its	  coarseness	  had	  offered	  a	  reminder	  of	  a	  reality	  he	  could	  hold	  onto.	  
Inside	  the	  shed	  was	  damp	  and	  smelled	  of	  summers	  at	  the	  ocean,	  but	  not	  the	  ocean	  he	  had	  
known.	  This	  was	  an	  ocean	  that	  could	  not	  breath.	  It	  was	  cramped.	  	  The	  damp	  air	  was	  
	  

	   	  
	  
46	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
screaming	  with	  claustrophobia	  in	  all	  corners.	  He	  could	  feel	  the	  plants	  pounding	  in	  against	  
the	  outer	  shells	  of	  the	  walls	  trying	  to	  take	  over	  the	  sudden	  sore	  implanted	  in	  the	  living	  
forest.	  Nails	  and	  screws	  were	  strewn	  unwittingly	  all	  over	  the	  wooden	  benches	  as	  if	  
awaiting	  the	  grave	  of	  a	  steel	  handled	  drawer.	  	  
His	  father	  had	  never	  taken	  him	  with	  him	  and	  after	  years	  of	  fearing	  an	  area	  so	  
protected	  by	  his	  father	  he	  was	  breathlessly	  nervous	  when	  entering	  for	  the	  first	  time.	  He	  
held	  on	  so	  tight	  to	  his	  father’s	  hand	  that	  the	  squeezing	  excreted	  sweat	  in	  his	  palm	  like	  a	  
kettle	  about	  to	  boil.	  Then	  he	  saw	  the	  string	  on	  the	  middle	  of	  a	  wooden	  shelf.	  He	  could	  tell	  
the	  other	  objects	  had	  their	  place	  because	  they	  were	  made	  out	  of	  metal	  and	  steel,	  however	  
the	  softness	  of	  the	  ball	  of	  string	  calmed	  the	  racing	  tempo	  of	  his	  heart.	  	  
“Papa	  look,”	  he	  said	  quietly	  as	  he	  pointed	  in	  the	  direction	  of	  the	  shelves.	  	  
His	  father	  turned	  his	  gaze	  followed	  his	  son’s	  fingertips.	  
“Do	  you	  want	  me	  to	  cut	  you	  some?”	  he	  whispered	  low	  as	  if	  they	  were	  disturbing	  the	  
sleeping	  shed.	  	  
The	  little	  boy	  gave	  a	  quick	  bob	  of	  his	  chin	  in	  approval	  and	  bashful	  excitement.	  His	  
father	  left	  him	  standing	  in	  the	  middle	  of	  the	  room	  as	  he	  slowly	  removed	  the	  ball	  of	  yarn	  
from	  the	  shelf	  and	  cut	  a	  section	  with	  a	  pair	  of	  rusted	  scissors.	  The	  room	  became	  looming	  
when	  his	  father’s	  back	  was	  turned	  to	  him.	  After	  a	  long	  moment	  he	  realized	  his	  eyes	  were	  
searching	  for	  the	  outline	  of	  his	  shoulders	  in	  the	  shadows.	  He	  could	  no	  longer	  tell	  which	  
bench	  his	  father	  was	  standing	  in	  front	  of.	  Suddenly	  his	  figure	  walked	  out	  from	  the	  darkness	  
holding	  the	  patch	  of	  loose	  yarn	  out	  in	  front	  of	  him.	  
The	  wheels	  were	  responding	  well	  to	  the	  cracks	  in	  the	  sidewalk	  as	  he	  held	  on	  tightly	  
to	  his	  mother’s	  soft	  hand.	  The	  string	  was	  wrapped	  around	  the	  wrist	  of	  his	  right	  arm	  as	  he	  

	  

	   	  
	  
47	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
gently	  guided	  the	  train	  along	  behind	  him.	  Obstacles	  lay	  along	  the	  path	  so	  walking	  from	  
shop	  to	  shop	  manifested	  into	  a	  series	  of	  adventures.	  While	  managing	  to	  keep	  hold	  of	  his	  
mother	  at	  her	  fast	  pace,	  a	  plastic	  bag	  transformed	  into	  a	  bubble	  of	  destruction	  avoidable	  
only	  by	  dodging	  other	  people	  walking	  along	  the	  busy	  avenue.	  	  
She	  was	  in	  the	  heels	  that	  pumped	  her	  calves	  gracefully	  along.	  He	  remembered	  the	  
first	  time	  she	  tried	  on	  the	  shoes	  after	  returning	  from	  Italy	  with	  his	  father.	  She	  had	  favored	  
the	  red	  leather	  stilettos	  ever	  since	  they	  arrived	  home.	  The	  time	  during	  their	  absence	  was	  
endless.	  Nora,	  his	  nanny	  had	  taken	  him	  to	  museums	  and	  parks,	  but	  it	  was	  not	  as	  intriguing	  
as	  the	  times	  he	  spent	  playing	  on	  his	  own.	  He	  would	  build	  cities	  out	  of	  wooden	  blocks,	  
experiment	  with	  ingredients	  his	  mother	  left	  out	  on	  the	  counter,	  pretend	  his	  father	  didn’t	  
see	  him	  huddled	  in	  the	  corner	  underneath	  his	  desk.	  He	  loved	  the	  way	  his	  father’s	  foot	  
tapped	  against	  the	  Persian	  rug	  as	  he	  listened	  to	  stock	  values	  on	  the	  radio,	  how	  his	  mother	  
tasted	  the	  dish	  every	  now	  and	  then	  to	  test	  the	  spice	  and	  thickness	  of	  a	  certain	  recipe.	  His	  
nanny	  was	  young.	  He	  wondered	  if	  the	  decisions	  she	  made	  were	  the	  right	  ones.	  	  
	  The	  train	  was	  speeding	  along,	  making	  turns	  at	  one	  hundred	  and	  thirty	  miles	  per	  
hour	  at	  least.	  The	  passengers	  were	  flanked	  to	  the	  sides	  of	  the	  rail	  cars	  and	  he	  wondered	  if	  
any	  were	  filling	  up	  with	  motion	  sickness.	  A	  little	  girl	  tried	  to	  read	  her	  mystery	  novel	  but	  all	  
of	  a	  sudden	  the	  book	  was	  slapped	  out	  of	  her	  hands	  and	  away	  from	  her	  eager	  eyes.	  A	  man	  
was	  slowly	  sipping	  his	  hot	  morning	  coffee	  when	  it	  suddenly	  spilled	  all	  over	  the	  tie	  his	  
mother	  had	  given	  him	  that	  year	  for	  Christmas.	  But	  then	  all	  was	  well	  again	  when	  they	  
entered	  the	  lush	  environment	  of	  the	  perfume	  shop	  or	  boutique	  that	  smelled	  like	  Jasmine	  or	  
Rose	  mixed	  with	  linen	  interwoven	  with	  silk.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

48	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Tailors	  were	  standing	  behind	  the	  counters	  measuring	  women	  who	  stood	  with	  a	  
cigarette	  pressed	  between	  lush	  lips.	  A	  look	  of	  boredom	  in	  their	  eyes	  made	  him	  wonder	  
what	  happened	  to	  them	  along	  their	  stroll	  to	  the	  shop.	  It	  made	  him	  sad	  to	  think	  they	  had	  lost	  
something	  important	  along	  the	  way.	  	  
~The	  South	  Side~	  
	   He	  came	  home	  late	  one	  rainy	  night.	  Standing	  in	  the	  main	  hallway,	  he	  removed	  his	  
coat	  and	  hat.	  Raindrops	  fell	  from	  the	  wool	  and	  dripped	  into	  what	  seemed	  like	  endless	  
puddles	  on	  the	  marble	  floor.	  	  
What	  a	  walk	  home,	  he	  thought	  to	  himself	  as	  he	  hung	  them	  on	  the	  looming	  coatrack.	  
He	  was	  glad	  he	  was	  away	  from	  the	  smell	  of	  the	  carcasses—hooves,	  tails	  and	  snouts	  were	  
the	  main	  castaways	  he	  encountered	  when	  he	  was	  returning	  from	  the	  district,	  but	  on	  some	  
nights	  he	  could	  not	  tell	  if	  the	  smell	  was	  that	  of	  animals	  or	  human	  bodies.	  	  
	  Most	  mornings	  he	  awoke	  knowing	  that	  he	  may	  be	  called	  again	  to	  return	  to	  the	  place	  
he	  had	  grown	  to	  loathe.	  His	  thoughts	  were	  sticky	  and	  hot.	  He	  tried	  to	  shed	  them	  as	  he	  
lathered	  and	  rinsed	  his	  face,	  picked	  out	  a	  button	  down	  and	  sash,	  a	  belt	  buckle	  and	  trousers,	  
cashmere	  socks	  and	  leather	  soles.	  He	  could	  not	  peel	  himself	  away	  from	  the	  resistance	  he	  
felt	  towards	  the	  kind	  of	  errands	  that	  fell	  so	  heavily	  under	  his	  responsibility.	  	  
On	  these	  particular	  days	  he	  always	  wore	  dark	  colored	  pants	  to	  avoid	  any	  trace	  of	  his	  
wanderings	  into	  the	  filth	  filled	  section	  of	  the	  island.	  After	  years	  of	  answering	  telegrams	  
telling	  the	  time	  and	  place	  of	  his	  demand,	  he	  quickly	  learned	  that	  it	  was	  only	  the	  time	  that	  
would	  change,	  not	  the	  place.	  The	  cobble	  stone	  streets	  and	  the	  bell	  he	  rang	  with	  the	  corner	  
of	  his	  handkerchief	  became	  a	  familiarity	  that	  would	  haunt	  him	  during	  moments	  he	  least	  
expected.	  
	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

49	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The	  attendant	  always	  greeted	  him	  the	  same—he	  placed	  his	  arm	  out	  for	  the	  coat	  with	  
a	  silent	  mouth	  and	  down	  cast	  eyes.	  He	  chose	  not	  to	  give	  this	  man	  his	  hat	  because	  he	  knew	  
soot	  was	  caked	  on	  his	  fingertips	  and	  did	  not	  want	  to	  risk	  ruining	  one	  camel	  skin	  after	  
another.	  The	  first	  time	  he	  found	  black	  fingertips	  on	  his	  hat	  he	  punched	  a	  hole	  through	  the	  
top	  and	  cast	  it	  into	  the	  Hudson.	  He	  did	  not	  want	  to	  play	  with	  the	  idea	  of	  someone	  finding	  it.	  
The	  danger	  his	  stitched	  initials	  on	  the	  rim	  posed	  could	  possibly	  cause	  a	  reporting	  to	  some	  
dime	  priced	  headline.	  He	  reassured	  himself	  he	  was	  not	  over	  reacting.	  Under	  these	  
circumstances	  one	  could	  never	  be	  too	  careful.	  	  

~Balloons~	  
	  

She	  walked	  in	  carrying	  red	  velvet	  cupcakes	  with	  yellow	  frosting.	  She	  decided	  not	  

to	  put	  sprinkles	  on	  top	  because	  he	  would	  most	  likely	  object	  to	  his	  friends	  seeing	  sprinkles	  
on	  his	  birthday	  cupcakes.	  He	  was	  too	  old	  for	  sprinkles	  anyway.	  	  
	  

When	  she	  passed	  through	  the	  hallway	  on	  her	  way	  to	  the	  living	  room	  she	  stopped	  

to	  marvel	  at	  the	  way	  the	  light	  fell	  underneath	  the	  entrance	  pillars.	  She	  had	  never	  before	  
seen	  so	  many	  tiny	  shoes	  all	  in	  the	  same	  place.	  She	  hadn’t	  the	  slightest	  idea	  that	  the	  shoes	  of	  
little	  boys	  and	  girls	  could	  look	  so	  picturesque	  next	  to	  her	  front	  door.	  	  
	  

Upon	  entering	  the	  living	  room	  the	  sight	  was	  too	  perfect.	  The	  girls	  wore	  bows	  

matching	  their	  their	  dresses	  and	  shoes.	  She	  noticed	  the	  bows	  complimented	  the	  shade	  of	  
their	  hair.	  The	  boys	  sported	  suits	  so	  well	  cut	  they	  looked	  twenty	  years	  older	  than	  they	  
actually	  were.	  Most	  of	  them	  were	  running	  around	  the	  table	  puffing	  the	  air	  like	  rhinos	  
hunting	  their	  prey.	  The	  girls	  were	  huddled	  near	  the	  fireplace	  waiting	  for	  whatever	  was	  to	  
come	  next.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

50	  	  	  	  	  
	  

The	  expressions	  on	  their	  flush	  faces	  made	  her	  remember	  the	  exhaustion	  of	  her	  

shyness	  at	  most	  all	  of	  the	  social	  gatherings	  she	  attended	  during	  her	  youth.	  	  She	  used	  to	  be	  
what	  her	  father	  called	  ‘a	  flower	  too	  afraid	  to	  wander	  away	  from	  the	  thorns’.	  He	  used	  to	  
make	  fun	  of	  her	  because	  she	  would	  spend	  hours	  in	  the	  afternoon	  preparing	  for	  the	  evening,	  
but	  once	  the	  liquor	  was	  flowing,	  any	  gentleman	  who	  would	  approach	  her	  was	  quickly	  
scared	  off	  by	  her	  silence	  and	  discomfort.	  She	  did	  not	  know	  how	  to	  talk	  to	  the	  young	  men	  
who	  were	  obviously	  in	  the	  phase	  of	  life	  where	  they	  saw	  themselves	  as	  men	  but	  were	  still	  
repressed	  by	  the	  rash	  disposition	  of	  boyhood.	  	  
	  

During	  these	  uncomfortable	  times	  she	  could	  hear	  her	  father’s	  laughter	  from	  

across	  the	  room.	  He	  sipped	  his	  whiskey	  and	  smoked	  a	  cigarette	  between	  bursts	  of	  laughter.	  
He	  poked	  fun	  at	  the	  fact	  that	  she	  was	  keeping	  herself	  in	  such	  a	  sticky	  place.	  “The	  sooner	  she	  
pushes	  herself	  away	  from	  the	  wall	  the	  more	  comfortable	  she	  will	  be.	  I	  remember	  the	  first	  
time	  I	  spoke	  to	  Ruth,	  I	  could	  barely	  keep	  my	  hands	  from	  shaking,”	  he	  went	  on	  to	  entertain	  
his	  listeners.	  He	  was	  making	  a	  fool	  of	  his	  only	  daughter.	  Was	  she	  supposed	  to	  be	  flattered	  
by	  her	  peers	  as	  they	  each	  came	  to	  talk	  to	  her	  of	  nothing	  but	  nonsense?	  	  
	  

The	  journey	  home	  always	  made	  her	  feel	  better.	  While	  she	  stared	  at	  the	  passing	  

fields,	  numb	  to	  the	  knot	  in	  her	  stomach,	  her	  mother	  would	  respond	  to	  her	  father’s	  drunk	  
teasing	  by	  recalling	  the	  thoughts	  that	  had	  been	  brewing	  in	  her	  mind	  all	  evening	  while	  
watching	  her	  husbands	  reactions.	  Her	  two	  older	  brothers	  stayed	  silent	  during	  the	  
conversations	  surrounding	  their	  sister’s	  impatience	  with	  these	  so-­‐called	  suitors;	  they	  could	  
not	  defend	  young	  men	  struggling	  with	  the	  duties	  and	  pentacles	  of	  courting,	  for	  they	  were	  
just	  as	  clumsy	  juggling	  with	  the	  game	  of	  female	  acceptance.	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

51	  	  	  	  	  
	  

But	  of	  course	  these	  were	  only	  children.	  The	  girls,	  she	  doubted,	  had	  never	  even	  had	  

their	  lips	  brushed	  with	  a	  kiss.	  When	  they	  saw	  her	  carrying	  the	  cupcakes	  their	  attention	  was	  
drawn	  in	  full	  force	  by	  the	  shape	  the	  baked	  flour	  held	  the	  frosting.	  	  
	  

She	  placed	  the	  cupcakes	  on	  the	  table,	  which	  was	  the	  signal	  for	  the	  maids	  to	  begin	  

the	  surprise	  she	  had	  planned.	  	  They	  did	  just	  as	  they	  had	  rehearsed	  the	  night	  before	  while	  
he	  was	  dreaming	  above	  them	  on	  his	  goose	  feathered	  mattress—all	  of	  a	  sudden	  the	  lights	  
were	  extinguished	  and	  the	  room	  was	  pitch	  black.	  The	  girls	  gave	  little	  yelps	  of	  fright	  and	  the	  
boys	  started	  to	  giggle	  knowing	  a	  birthday	  cake	  would	  surely	  come	  next.	  	  
	  

The	  heavy	  wooden	  door	  that	  led	  to	  the	  kitchen	  swung	  open	  revealing	  the	  

silhouette	  of	  a	  magician.	  Her	  smile	  beamed	  in	  the	  darkness	  when	  she	  realized	  the	  little	  boys	  
and	  girls	  had	  left	  their	  concrete	  positions	  to	  gather	  around	  him;	  they	  no	  longer	  cared	  who	  
they	  were	  standing	  next	  to	  or	  where	  they	  were.	  All	  they	  cared	  about	  was	  the	  man	  who	  had	  
drowned	  everything	  in	  a	  magical	  midst.	  
	  

The	  magician	  stood	  in	  front	  of	  a	  rolling	  tray	  that	  held	  the	  crystal	  glasses	  and	  

plates	  set	  out	  for	  the	  party.	  His	  hands	  begin	  to	  search	  for	  something.	  All	  eyes	  watched	  him	  
carefully—including	  those	  of	  the	  maids	  standing	  against	  the	  wall.	  He	  patted	  his	  pockets,	  
removed	  his	  hat	  and	  looked	  inside,	  but	  what	  he	  was	  looking	  for	  was	  nowhere	  to	  be	  found.	  
He	  hunched	  forward	  and	  let	  out	  a	  sigh.	  Then	  something	  in	  the	  room	  caught	  his	  eye.	  He	  
slowly	  began	  to	  make	  his	  way	  towards	  the	  only	  source	  of	  light	  in	  the	  room.	  The	  children	  
parted	  ways	  like	  the	  Red	  Sea	  for	  Moses.	  	  
	  

When	  he	  reached	  the	  roaring	  fireplace,	  he	  got	  down	  on	  his	  knees,	  clapped	  his	  

hands	  twice	  and	  quickly	  reached	  into	  the	  fire	  pulling	  out	  a	  bright	  white	  bunny.	  He	  

	  

	   	  
	  
52	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
immediately	  coddled	  it	  against	  his	  chest,	  whispering	  something	  in	  its	  ear.	  The	  bunny	  
looked	  perfectly	  relaxed	  as	  if	  it	  had	  just	  come	  from	  a	  wild	  patch	  of	  fresh	  carrots	  and	  clover.	  	  
	  

The	  children	  screamed	  in	  approval.	  The	  maids	  held	  their	  hands	  flat	  against	  their	  

chests	  aghast	  with	  relief.	  	  All	  she	  could	  do	  was	  smile	  wildly	  as	  she	  thought	  about	  what	  was	  
to	  come	  next.	  
	  

The	  magician	  gave	  the	  bunny	  to	  a	  girl	  standing	  close	  to	  him	  and	  as	  soon	  as	  she	  

had	  it	  in	  her	  arms	  the	  children	  began	  to	  stroke	  its	  soft	  coat	  obsessively.	  	  He	  casually	  walked	  
back	  to	  the	  tray,	  the	  tail	  of	  his	  long	  coat	  trailing	  behind	  him.	  The	  children	  followed	  him	  back	  
over	  as	  the	  little	  girl	  held	  the	  rabbit	  with	  extreme	  responsibility.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

	  Next,	  he	  pulled	  a	  silk	  cloth	  from	  an	  inside	  pocket	  and	  placed	  it	  over	  the	  glasses	  

and	  plates.	  He	  told	  a	  little	  boy	  to	  blow	  on	  it	  three	  times	  and	  make	  a	  wish	  for	  his	  favorite	  
food,	  drink,	  or	  sweet.	  The	  boy	  approached	  the	  tray	  and	  closed	  his	  eyes	  intently	  for	  a	  few	  
seconds,	  puckered	  out	  his	  lips	  and	  blew	  three	  fast	  breaths	  onto	  the	  glowing	  red	  silk.	  The	  
magician	  gave	  a	  nod	  of	  approval	  and	  with	  a	  quick	  thrash	  of	  his	  arm	  the	  silk	  was	  removed	  
and	  a	  plate	  of	  chocolate	  covered	  strawberries,	  a	  chocolate	  milkshake,	  and	  macaroni	  and	  
cheese	  were	  sitting	  upon	  the	  tray	  as	  if	  they	  had	  been	  there	  all	  along.	  	  
	  

“All	  three	  you	  wished	  for	  eh?	  Did	  I	  not	  say	  ‘or’?”	  	  

	  

The	  little	  boy	  sank	  back	  into	  the	  crowd	  embarrassed.	  The	  others	  around	  him	  

looked	  towards	  him	  for	  the	  hint	  of	  a	  tear,	  but	  it	  never	  came.	  
	  

The	  magician	  placed	  the	  red	  silk	  back	  over	  the	  plates	  and	  cups	  and	  whispered	  

something	  that	  sounded	  to	  her	  like	  Romanian.	  With	  another	  flick	  of	  his	  hand	  the	  cloth	  was	  
removed	  and	  the	  treats	  disappeared.	  She	  had	  known	  his	  reputation	  was	  unusually	  high,	  but	  
she	  did	  not	  know	  he	  was	  a	  miracle	  worker	  of	  his	  craft.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

53	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Observing	  the	  lines	  around	  his	  mouth,	  she	  realized	  he	  had	  a	  solemn	  look	  about	  

him.	  The	  only	  flicker	  of	  a	  smile	  she	  saw	  was	  at	  the	  blink	  of	  a	  second	  right	  before	  each	  trick	  
was	  completed.	  She	  wondered	  where	  he	  had	  been	  before	  he	  made	  his	  way	  into	  their	  
section	  of	  the	  city.	  	  
	  

He	  motioned	  for	  the	  bunny	  and	  placed	  it	  on	  the	  tray.	  It	  sat	  quite	  contently	  on	  a	  

plate	  for	  him	  and	  as	  he	  gracefully	  folded	  and	  tucked	  the	  silk	  into	  his	  pocket,	  he	  motioned	  
for	  the	  birthday	  boy	  to	  join	  him—this	  was	  what	  she	  had	  been	  waiting	  for—the	  little	  boy	  
stepped	  shyly	  forward	  away	  from	  the	  comfort	  of	  so	  many	  bodies	  to	  stand	  in	  the	  cold	  air	  
next	  to	  the	  magician	  and	  his	  mysterious	  hands.	  He	  rolled	  up	  his	  sleeves	  for	  the	  final	  act	  and	  
the	  little	  boy	  noticed	  there	  was	  a	  huge	  scar	  on	  the	  man’s	  forearm.	  He	  stared	  at	  it	  until	  he	  
heard	  a	  hoarse	  voice	  give	  a	  strict	  order.	  	  
	  

“Place	  your	  hand	  upon	  the	  rabbit	  and	  make	  your	  birthday	  wish.”	  

	  

He	  looked	  to	  his	  mother	  for	  approval.	  She	  gave	  him	  a	  nod	  of	  encouragement	  and	  

he	  inched	  his	  way	  towards	  the	  animal.	  The	  bunny	  didn’t	  budge	  under	  the	  weight	  of	  his	  
hand;	  in	  fact,	  the	  creature	  seemed	  more	  at	  peace	  with	  the	  human	  contact.	  Its	  eyes	  fluttered	  
shut.	  	  
	  

The	  silk	  sash	  was	  placed	  over	  the	  boy’s	  hand.	  He	  could	  feel	  the	  rabbit	  breathing	  

steadily	  under	  his	  palm.	  Its	  heartbeat	  calmed	  his	  quickened	  pulse.	  He	  closed	  his	  eyes	  and	  
tried	  to	  think	  of	  something	  reasonable	  to	  wish	  for.	  There	  was	  a	  good	  chance	  it	  would	  come	  
true	  so	  he	  had	  to	  think	  carefully.	  He	  couldn’t	  wish	  for	  what	  he	  really	  wanted	  because	  he	  
didn’t	  want	  anyone	  to	  know	  that	  what	  he	  really	  wanted	  was	  to	  touch	  her	  lace	  covered	  skin	  
and	  kiss	  her	  perfumed	  breast.	  He	  was	  sure	  the	  magician	  could	  hear	  his	  thoughts	  because	  he	  

	  

	   	  
	  
54	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
let	  a	  breath	  briefly	  tug	  his	  vocal	  chords,	  creating	  a	  deliberate	  sound	  of	  impatience.	  He	  
quickly	  refocused	  his	  mind	  and	  wished	  for	  what	  any	  little	  boy	  would	  wish	  for.	  	  
	  

When	  he	  opened	  his	  eyes,	  the	  cloth	  was	  removed	  and	  his	  hand	  was	  hovering	  

above	  a	  triple-­‐decker	  cake.	  It	  was	  his	  favorite:	  chocolate	  mousse.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  He	  knew	  his	  mother	  had	  planned	  this.	  	  When	  he	  flew	  down	  the	  staircase	  this	  
morning	  he	  could	  tell	  the	  air	  about	  the	  house	  was	  different.	  There	  was	  a	  hushed	  tone	  
lingering	  upon	  the	  cherry	  blossom	  wallpaper.	  Even	  before	  that,	  while	  he	  was	  still	  greeting	  
the	  morning	  light,	  the	  gargoyles	  outside	  his	  window	  were	  stricken	  with	  tension,	  awaiting	  
the	  moment	  they	  would	  be	  able	  to	  open	  their	  stone	  shut	  eyes	  to	  hunt	  the	  creatures	  that	  had	  
been	  itching	  them	  in	  their	  nightmares.	  
	  

	  He	  had	  completely	  forgotten	  about	  the	  rabbit	  until	  a	  strange	  noise	  came	  from	  the	  

ceiling.	  The	  creature,	  supported	  by	  a	  ribbon	  and	  two	  large	  blue	  balloons,	  slowly	  cascaded	  
down	  from	  some	  unknown	  source.	  Without	  any	  delay,	  the	  children	  took	  notice	  and	  began	  
to	  scatter	  around	  the	  room	  frantically,	  not	  knowing	  where	  the	  rabbit	  would	  land.	  Just	  
before	  it	  was	  set	  to	  land	  on	  the	  table,	  it	  bounced	  back	  up	  again	  and	  floated	  high	  above	  the	  
small	  but	  eager	  hands.	  Down	  it	  floated	  in	  the	  direction	  of	  a	  maid,	  who	  immediately	  reached	  
up	  her	  arms	  thinking	  it	  well	  past	  the	  time	  for	  the	  end	  of	  the	  highly	  anticipated	  show,	  
however,	  just	  before	  she	  could	  touch	  its	  limp	  limbs,	  it	  bounced	  back	  up	  again.	  	  
	  

Floating	  higher	  and	  higher	  above	  the	  stunned	  audience,	  the	  rabbit	  simply	  went	  

along	  with	  wherever	  the	  balloons	  floated.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  She	  looked	  to	  her	  little	  boy.	  His	  eyes	  were	  entranced	  upon	  the	  last	  beams	  of	  
sunlight	  as	  his	  birthday	  sun	  set	  its	  way	  towards	  the	  tips	  of	  the	  skyline.	  	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

55	  	  	  	  	  
	  

~Ponderosa	  Pines~	  
	  

	  

She	  came	  every	  Wednesday	  afternoon	  at	  five	  o’clock.	  She	  knocked	  five	  times	  

before	  coughing	  into	  her	  already	  grit	  covered	  sleeve.	  The	  cotton	  of	  her	  clothes	  always	  the	  
same	  colors	  of	  brown	  dirt	  and	  charcoal	  gray.	  Her	  layered	  skirts	  approached	  the	  top	  of	  her	  
hips	  like	  the	  flood	  line	  on	  a	  tree:	  the	  lower	  half	  seemed	  darker	  and	  slimmer	  than	  that	  of	  the	  
dried	  upper	  section.	  	  
	  

He	  could	  always	  smell	  her	  before	  he	  reached	  the	  door	  and	  pulled	  with	  all	  his	  

strength.	  Her	  smell	  reminded	  him	  that	  he	  had	  not	  practiced	  the	  piano	  at	  all	  this	  week.	  A	  
terrible	  mistake	  due	  in	  part	  because	  his	  cousin	  had	  come	  the	  past	  weekend	  for	  her	  
occasional	  visit.	  She,	  however,	  smelled	  nothing	  like	  the	  piano	  teacher.	  	  
	  

Katherine,	  his	  younger	  cousin	  always	  smelled	  of	  cinnamon	  and	  vanilla.	  He	  

remembered	  for	  the	  smell	  for	  the	  first	  time	  at	  the	  end	  of	  the	  longest	  journey	  he	  had	  ever	  
taken.	  	  
	  

A	  stream	  train	  had	  taken	  him	  hostage	  for	  days.	  He	  couldn’t	  keep	  track	  of	  how	  

many	  times	  he	  had	  woken	  and	  how	  many	  times	  he	  had	  fallen	  asleep	  to	  the	  rocking	  of	  the	  
car	  on	  the	  steel	  tracks.	  During	  his	  waking	  hours	  he	  unpacked	  his	  trunk	  and	  dangled	  his	  
clothes	  from	  the	  rafters	  above.	  His	  fort	  would	  be	  the	  perfect	  camouflage	  to	  the	  looting	  
Natives	  if	  they	  tried	  to	  jump	  on	  the	  train	  at	  the	  next	  station.	  	  
	  

They	  would	  not	  find	  him	  because	  they	  would	  have	  no	  idea	  that	  what	  was	  hanging	  

were	  clothes—because	  they	  didn’t	  wear	  any.	  He	  heard	  tales	  that	  they	  wore	  skins	  of	  animals	  
instead	  of	  clothes;	  some	  were	  as	  coarse	  as	  the	  skin	  of	  a	  boar	  and	  others	  as	  soft	  as	  a	  bear.	  	  
	  

He	  would	  peek	  out	  from	  behind	  his	  cloth	  bunker	  and	  if	  he	  saw	  anyone	  he	  would	  

fall	  back	  on	  his	  bed	  as	  stiff	  as	  a	  board,	  not	  making	  any	  sound,	  hands	  clenched	  at	  his	  side.	  	  
	  

	   	  
	  
56	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
When	  the	  train	  stopped,	  his	  mother	  shared	  her	  surprise	  as	  to	  why	  all	  his	  clothes	  were	  
unpacked	  and	  hanging	  about	  him.	  Her	  banter	  was	  quickly	  drowned	  out	  when	  he	  realized	  
there	  was	  something	  luring	  him	  outside	  and	  away	  from	  her	  bickering.	  
	  

	  The	  aromatic	  bliss	  was	  coming	  from	  giants	  with	  huge	  trunks	  for	  bodies.	  Their	  

hair	  was	  a	  tiny	  bit	  thicker	  than	  his	  own,	  green,	  no	  longer	  than	  his	  fingers,	  and	  contrived	  a	  
tart	  taste	  when	  crushed	  in	  his	  teeth	  and	  tasted.	  	  
	  

The	  green	  of	  the	  pines	  spread	  outwards	  and	  over	  across	  the	  steep	  Rocky	  

Mountains.	  As	  he	  turned	  back	  to	  his	  new	  friend	  he	  realized	  there	  was	  something	  sticky	  on	  
his	  fingers.	  It	  was	  oozing	  out	  of	  the	  bark	  like	  blood	  from	  a	  cut.	  Their	  blood	  was	  thick	  and	  
smelled	  sweet	  like	  honey.	  	  
	  

The	  trees	  were	  still	  and	  silent.	  Their	  blood	  had	  dried	  thick	  in	  some	  spots	  in	  the	  

shape	  of	  dried	  tears.	  What	  could	  have	  harmed	  these	  gentle	  trees?	  The	  little	  boy	  couldn’t	  
help	  but	  feel	  a	  string	  in	  his	  chest	  tighten	  and	  almost	  snap.	  A	  heart	  broken	  buck	  must	  have	  
come	  to	  this	  tree	  and	  scraped	  it	  in	  agony	  after	  losing	  his	  mate.	  His	  antlers	  tore	  at	  the	  flesh	  
of	  the	  well-­‐rooted	  creature	  causing	  pine	  needles	  to	  fall	  like	  snow	  upon	  the	  buck’s	  chestnut	  
skin.	  	  
	  

“That	  is	  a	  Ponderosa	  Pine	  son,”	  his	  father	  said	  in	  response	  to	  his	  son’s	  petrified	  

gaze.	  He	  slapped	  its	  trunk	  as	  if	  it	  was	  an	  old	  friend	  of	  his,	  “or	  as	  Uncle	  Bill	  likes	  to	  call	  it,	  a	  
Blackjack	  Pine,”	  his	  father	  said	  loud	  enough	  for	  all	  to	  hear.	  He	  stood	  with	  his	  hands	  on	  his	  
hips,	  his	  suspenders	  had	  been	  removed	  from	  his	  shoulders	  for	  relief	  from	  the	  sweat	  that	  
had	  settled	  between	  his	  shoulder	  blades	  from	  the	  journey.	  Uncle	  Bill	  smiled	  his	  toothless	  
smile	  when	  he	  heard	  his	  brother	  mention	  his	  name,	  then	  turned	  around	  and	  continued	  on	  
to	  guide	  the	  mass	  of	  servants	  and	  luggage.	  	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

57	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“Why	  is	  this	  tree	  bleeding?”	  the	  little	  boy	  asked	  in	  a	  breath	  of	  embarrassment.	  	  

	  

“Something	  has	  torn	  into	  its	  bark.”	  

	  

“It	  was	  the	  heart	  broken	  buck,”	  he	  whispered.	  	  

	  

“A	  heart	  broken	  buck	  eh?”	  his	  father	  answered	  looking	  around	  to	  see	  where	  the	  

	  

others	  were,	  whether	  or	  not	  his	  bound	  books	  were	  still	  in	  the	  wagon	  behind	  him,	  and	  
where	  his	  wife	  had	  chosen	  to	  perch	  for	  a	  moment	  of	  rest.	  She	  had	  chosen	  a	  moss	  covered	  
rock	  and	  was	  gazing	  at	  a	  purple	  Aster	  she	  had	  found	  at	  her	  feet.	  
	  

He	  attempted	  to	  cheer	  the	  boy	  up.	  	  

	  

“There’s	  no	  such	  thing	  son,	  if	  a	  buck	  loses	  his	  doe	  he	  will	  not	  survive.	  He	  is	  killed	  

by	  his	  opponent.”	  The	  little	  boy’s	  eyes	  looked	  blank.	  “One	  wins	  and	  the	  other	  must	  fall	  
never	  to	  rise	  again.”	  Still	  his	  eyes	  were	  cloudy	  with	  confusion.	  “Listen	  son,	  sometimes	  in	  life	  
we	  have	  to	  fight	  for	  what	  we	  want,	  all	  creatures	  must	  learn	  to	  fight,	  and	  sometimes	  that	  
means	  we	  prosper	  over	  others,	  one	  winner	  and	  one	  loser,	  one	  heart	  broken	  and	  the	  other	  
triumphant	  in	  his	  strength.”	  
	  

The	  sweet	  smell	  of	  vanilla	  and	  cinnamon	  lingered	  in	  his	  memory	  until	  the	  piano	  

teacher’s	  perfume	  reminded	  him	  to	  follow	  her	  through	  the	  main	  hall	  and	  into	  the	  parlor	  
where	  the	  Steinway	  was	  sleeping.	  He	  unfolded	  the	  protective	  layer	  of	  wood	  resting	  over	  
the	  ivory	  keys.	  The	  Bach	  sheet	  music	  was	  already	  open	  to	  the	  piece	  he	  was	  meant	  to	  have	  
memorized	  and	  rehearsed.	  Thankfully	  he	  figured	  out	  how	  to	  successfully	  listen	  to	  a	  record	  
on	  the	  Berliner	  Gramophone	  next	  to	  his	  father’s	  pastel	  colored	  liquor	  bottles.	  He	  found	  the	  
record	  and	  played	  it	  a	  couple	  of	  times	  that	  morning	  before	  his	  mother	  had	  enough	  time	  to	  
be	  torn	  from	  magazines	  and	  cigarettes	  to	  notice	  he	  was	  once	  again	  in	  the	  room	  of	  the	  house	  

	  

	   	  
	  
58	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
that	  was	  strictly	  off	  limits.	  It	  was	  reserved	  for	  her	  husband	  when	  he	  was	  not	  to	  be	  
interrupted.	  
	  

The	  little	  boy	  politely	  asked	  his	  teacher	  if	  she	  wanted	  a	  glass	  of	  water	  before	  they	  

began	  the	  lesson.	  She	  quietly	  nodded	  her	  head	  in	  agreement	  with	  a	  sense	  of	  relief	  upon	  her	  
sweated	  upper	  lip.	  The	  stairs	  up	  from	  the	  subway	  always	  made	  her	  legs	  shake.	  Her	  knees	  
were	  no	  longer	  as	  elastic	  as	  they	  used	  to	  be.	  She	  preferred	  the	  elevated	  lines	  with	  fewer	  
stairs	  and	  a	  better	  view.	  He	  half	  listened	  to	  her	  mutters	  and	  nodded	  as	  he	  left	  to	  wander	  
through	  the	  maze	  of	  servant’s	  quarters.	  He	  counted	  the	  minutes	  it	  took	  him	  to	  pour	  the	  
water	  from	  the	  pitcher	  subtracting	  them	  from	  the	  dreadful	  hour	  they	  had	  to	  spend	  together	  
pent	  up	  next	  to	  the	  window	  as	  whistles	  from	  the	  games	  being	  played	  in	  the	  park	  below	  
floated	  up	  to	  them.	  	  
	  

“Now	  remember	  the	  piano	  is	  quiet,”	  she	  hissed,	  “and	  the	  forte	  is	  strong,”	  she	  

roared.	  She	  pointed	  to	  the	  music	  and	  a	  pencil	  somehow	  appeared	  from	  the	  bun	  on	  top	  of	  
her	  head.	  “Now,	  begin	  again.”	  	  
	  

His	  shoulders	  squeezed	  upwards	  to	  bring	  his	  elbows	  in	  and	  his	  fingers	  up	  lightly	  

on	  the	  keys,	  and	  then	  his	  joints	  screamed	  when	  the	  time	  to	  play	  heavy	  came	  again.	  By	  the	  
end	  of	  the	  hour	  he	  was	  in	  no	  mood	  to	  play	  outside	  with	  the	  others.	  
~Marriage~	  
	  

She	  watched	  as	  he	  placed	  his	  knife	  down	  on	  the	  outer	  rim	  of	  his	  plate	  and	  chewed	  

his	  freshly	  cut	  New	  York	  strip	  with	  a	  sterile	  look	  on	  his	  face.	  His	  eyes	  were	  set	  in	  the	  
direction	  of	  the	  vase	  in	  the	  center	  of	  the	  table.	  It	  was	  overflowing	  with	  fresh	  day	  lilies	  that	  a	  
maid	  had	  excitedly	  brought	  back	  from	  a	  hidden	  oasis	  she	  found	  in	  the	  middle	  of	  the	  park.	  

	  

	   	  
	  
59	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
She	  had	  ignored	  the	  maid’s	  smile	  and	  tried	  to	  quiet	  her	  wonder	  as	  to	  why	  the	  girl	  had	  been	  
wandering	  around	  the	  park	  in	  the	  first	  place.	  	  
	  

She	  remembered	  the	  letter	  she	  read	  earlier	  that	  afternoon.	  It	  was	  from	  her	  

brother,	  the	  younger	  of	  the	  two,	  telling	  her	  of	  his	  most	  recent	  love	  affair	  and	  its	  demise,	  
how	  he	  was	  in	  need	  of	  money	  and	  had	  an	  idea	  for	  a	  thriving	  what	  was	  it?	  Oh	  yes	  this	  is	  
where	  he	  left	  off,	  a	  thriving	  soap	  business.	  	  
	  

“Darling,	  you’ll	  never	  believe	  the	  idea	  my	  brother	  has	  for	  a	  business	  venture.”	  	  

He	  stopped	  chewing.	  The	  one	  word	  in	  the	  entire	  English	  language	  that	  he	  did	  not	  care	  to	  
hear	  was	  business.	  All	  day	  he	  had	  been	  listening	  to	  two	  quarrelling	  partners	  fight	  over	  the	  
percentage	  of	  their	  worth.	  He	  was	  sick	  of	  his	  colleagues,	  his	  business	  associates	  whom	  he	  
owned	  secretly.	  All	  their	  profits,	  all	  their	  interests,	  all	  their	  precious	  stocks	  and	  bonds.	  He	  
could	  laugh	  in	  their	  faces	  if	  he	  wanted	  to.	  Instead	  he	  laughed	  at	  his	  wife	  who	  was	  trying	  to	  
relay	  something	  she	  found	  amusing,	  a	  joke	  he	  found	  incredibly	  sour.	  He	  put	  his	  fork	  and	  
knife	  down,	  wiped	  the	  corners	  of	  his	  lips	  with	  his	  napkin,	  and	  excused	  himself	  into	  his	  
study.	  	  
	  

She	  watched	  the	  maid	  clear	  his	  plate.	  Suddenly	  it	  was	  as	  if	  he	  had	  never	  even	  been	  

there	  at	  all.	  	  
~Faith~	  
He	  wished	  he	  were	  home.	  It	  was	  cold.	  With	  each	  breath	  his	  lungs	  froze	  and	  cracked.	  
The	  look	  on	  his	  mother’s	  face	  frightened	  him	  and	  he	  did	  not	  want	  to	  be	  left	  alone.	  
Somebody	  important	  had	  died.	  His	  ghost	  was	  now	  visiting	  everyone	  he	  had	  known,	  and	  he	  
preferred	  to	  be	  with	  his	  mother	  when	  it	  was	  his	  turn	  to	  be	  visited	  by	  Mr.	  Hickox.	  	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

60	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Her	  hand	  was	  soft	  around	  his.	  They	  arrived	  at	  the	  church	  late.	  A	  crowd	  of	  people	  

waited	  outside.	  The	  pattern	  along	  the	  sidewalk	  was	  a	  repetition	  of	  black	  coats	  and	  white	  
roses	  with	  an	  occasional	  neck	  boasting	  pearls	  at	  the	  base	  of	  neatly	  pinned	  hair.	  	  
	  

A	  woman	  not	  too	  far	  away	  sobbed	  into	  her	  handkerchief,	  the	  man	  beside	  her	  stared	  

at	  the	  ground	  ahead	  of	  him	  not	  even	  attempting	  to	  comfort	  her.	  The	  doors	  to	  the	  church	  
swung	  open	  and	  the	  mass	  of	  mourners	  slowly	  proceeded	  into	  the	  candle	  lit	  antechamber.	  	  
	  

An	  organ	  accompanied	  the	  choir	  of	  high-­‐pitched	  voices	  on	  the	  top	  balcony.	  Light	  

from	  the	  stained	  glass	  windows	  pierced	  the	  room	  with	  ribbons	  of	  color.	  	  A	  group	  of	  men	  
already	  stood	  in	  the	  first	  row	  near	  the	  altar	  with	  their	  backs	  against	  gathering	  crowd.	  Their	  
heads	  were	  tilted	  and	  their	  arms	  rested	  in	  front	  of	  their	  ironed	  lapels.	  They	  waited	  for	  their	  
orders	  like	  dutiful	  pawns	  in	  a	  game.	  	  The	  little	  boy	  squeezed	  his	  mother’s	  hand	  when	  he	  
recognized	  his	  father	  standing	  among	  the	  other	  men.	  Tufts	  of	  his	  auburn	  hair	  caught	  
streams	  of	  red,	  green,	  and	  blue	  light.	  	  	  
	  

The	  music	  bellowed	  into	  the	  tiniest	  spaces	  inside	  his	  head.	  All	  he	  wanted	  was	  to	  

listen	  to	  the	  birds	  call	  to	  each	  other	  as	  the	  sun	  warmed	  the	  frozen	  skyscrapers.	  The	  bird’s	  
melodies	  were	  a	  relief	  in	  comparison	  to	  the	  sound	  of	  the	  booming	  organ	  pipes.	  	  	  
	  

The	  bleeding	  man	  above	  the	  altar	  caught	  the	  little	  boy’s	  gaze.	  His	  thoughts	  moved	  

away	  from	  the	  birds	  perched	  on	  the	  steeple	  to	  the	  tears	  falling	  from	  the	  tortured	  man’s	  
face.	  They	  fell	  from	  his	  hollow	  porcelain	  cheeks	  onto	  the	  petals	  of	  flowers	  in	  front	  of	  the	  
altar.	  The	  crying	  man	  looked	  upwards	  to	  the	  birds.	  He	  wanted	  to	  join	  them	  too.	  He	  would	  
have	  helped	  the	  crying	  man	  up	  the	  stairs	  to	  the	  steeple	  and	  pressed	  his	  wounds	  to	  keep	  
them	  from	  bleeding.	  His	  nanny	  taught	  him	  to	  hold	  pressure	  on	  a	  cut	  to	  help	  it	  heal.	  He	  

	  

	   	  
	  
61	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
would	  wipe	  up	  the	  drips	  of	  blood	  from	  where	  they	  fell	  next	  to	  their	  footprints	  to	  keep	  the	  
ghost	  from	  following	  them.	  	  
	  

The	  doors	  to	  the	  church	  opened	  blinding	  anyone	  who	  turned	  around.	  The	  organ	  

suddenly	  ceased	  from	  playing	  and	  the	  six	  men	  walked	  together	  towards	  the	  doorway.	  He	  
wanted	  to	  reach	  for	  his	  father	  as	  he	  passed.	  He	  knew	  he	  was	  bleeding	  like	  the	  man	  up	  on	  
the	  cross.	  If	  only	  he	  could	  grab	  his	  hand	  and	  squeeze	  his	  wounds	  to	  keep	  them	  from	  
terrorizing	  him	  for	  the	  rest	  of	  his	  life.	  He	  knew	  he	  was	  suffering	  silently	  among	  the	  other	  
men.	  
Their	  figures	  disappeared	  through	  the	  lighted	  archway.	  The	  crowd	  waited	  in	  silence.	  
He	  looked	  to	  the	  man	  on	  the	  cross	  and	  realized	  his	  tears	  had	  disappeared;	  the	  only	  hint	  of	  a	  
tear	  was	  the	  beads	  of	  water	  forming	  not	  on	  the	  man’s	  face	  but	  on	  his	  forehead.	  
	  The	  echoing	  footsteps	  of	  the	  men	  were	  heard	  before	  they	  reappeared	  in	  the	  
doorway.	  Slowly,	  a	  rectangular	  shape	  tore	  into	  the	  light.	  The	  coffin	  created	  a	  tunnel	  of	  
darkness	  that	  guided	  the	  carriers	  of	  the	  dead	  man	  back	  to	  the	  altar.	  	  	  
They	  hoisted	  the	  coffin	  off	  their	  shoulders	  and	  carefully	  placed	  it	  in	  front	  of	  the	  altar.	  
A	  man	  dressed	  in	  gold	  trimmed	  robes	  spoke	  about	  the	  presence	  of	  many	  loved	  ones	  and	  the	  
blood	  spilt	  trying	  to	  protect	  the	  one	  who	  now	  lay	  dead.	  His	  hands	  moved	  rapidly	  up	  and	  
down	  as	  his	  words	  rose	  and	  fell.	  
She	  wondered	  if	  it	  was	  the	  hand	  of	  her	  husband	  who	  spilt	  blood	  trying	  to	  protect	  
this	  man.	  Words	  are	  weak	  compared	  to	  actions.	  At	  times	  one	  must	  use	  force	  to	  be	  heard.	  He	  
spoke	  many	  this	  times	  about	  the	  importance	  of	  protection.	  The	  man	  who	  now	  lay	  
underneath	  the	  dark	  ceiling	  of	  his	  coffin	  staring	  into	  what	  lay	  beyond	  the	  light	  of	  his	  world	  
had	  meant	  a	  lot	  to	  him	  as	  a	  companion,	  a	  confidant	  of	  sorts.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

62	  	  	  	  	  
	  

She	  was	  thirsty.	  Her	  mouth	  was	  parched.	  She	  had	  fretted	  about	  missing	  the	  service.	  
The	  nervousness	  had	  made	  her	  create	  hypothetical	  disasters	  in	  her	  head:	  the	  church	  in	  
flames,	  a	  killer	  shutting	  the	  impending	  doors	  and	  firing	  round	  after	  round	  of	  ammunition	  
killing	  everyone	  in	  the	  congregation.	  They	  would	  arrive	  to	  the	  unique	  silence	  that	  follows	  
the	  murdering	  of	  hundreds	  of	  people	  on	  holy	  ground.	  	  
	  Her	  husband	  had	  sent	  word	  of	  the	  death	  last	  night.	  A	  telegram	  arrived	  abruptly	  as	  
she	  washed	  her	  face.	  She	  frantically	  dried	  her	  face.	  Her	  skin	  was	  red	  as	  she	  scanned	  the	  
message.	  Mr.	  Hickox.	  Dead.	  Service	  at	  Ten	  O’clock.	  	  
Her	  son	  was	  asleep	  dreaming	  of	  pirates	  on	  the	  Hudson.	  The	  house	  was	  silent.	  She	  sat	  
by	  the	  fire,	  her	  nerves	  flared	  as	  she	  speculated	  the	  whereabouts	  of	  her	  husband.	  She	  knew	  
he	  was	  safe,	  but	  where	  he	  was	  she	  could	  not	  know,	  and	  who	  he	  was	  with	  she	  would	  never	  
know.	  
He	  had	  many	  faces.	  Those	  she	  knew	  most	  intimately	  were	  those	  of	  the	  protector	  and	  
provider.	  He	  gave	  her	  and	  their	  child	  everything	  they	  could	  ever	  need,	  more	  than	  they	  
could	  ever	  need.	  She	  had	  options	  and	  freedoms	  that	  many	  lacked;	  yet	  over	  the	  past	  few	  
years,	  a	  certain	  depth	  to	  him	  had	  become	  shallow.	  He	  ate	  and	  slept	  like	  any	  normal	  man	  
and	  was	  present	  as	  a	  father	  but	  vacant	  as	  a	  partner.	  When	  she	  communicated	  with	  him	  her	  
words	  became	  an	  echo	  searching	  the	  many	  cracks	  of	  an	  endless	  cliff,	  all	  she	  could	  hear	  was	  
her	  own	  voice	  spiraling	  back	  to	  her.	  He	  was	  a	  man	  of	  vast	  personality,	  many	  stories,	  and	  
many	  years.	  The	  echo	  bounced	  off	  him	  penetrating	  nothing	  but	  a	  brittle	  spirit.	  If	  he	  did	  
listen,	  she	  could	  sense	  no	  response,	  not	  even	  a	  hint	  of	  a	  reaction.	  Recently	  his	  words	  were	  
short,	  to	  the	  point,	  a	  yes	  or	  no;	  everything	  seemed	  to	  be	  a	  plead	  to	  be	  excused	  or	  left	  alone.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

63	  	  	  	  	  
	  

She	  looked	  towards	  him.	  His	  head	  tilted	  forward	  in	  grief.	  She	  wanted	  to	  reach	  for	  
him	  but	  such	  an	  inappropriate	  gesture	  would	  have	  done	  no	  good.	  There	  is	  always	  honor	  in	  
silence,	  her	  mother	  had	  told	  her	  once.	  This	  silence	  was	  blasphemous.	  It	  was	  killing	  her.	  	  
The	  priest	  began	  the	  closing	  prayer.	  The	  mass	  of	  mourners	  stood	  collectively	  and	  
crossed	  themselves.	  Their	  right	  hands	  finished	  the	  gesture	  with	  a	  tap	  against	  their	  hearts.	  
She	  looked	  down	  to	  her	  son.	  His	  lips	  were	  blue	  but	  his	  cheeks	  burned	  red	  and	  his	  brow	  
perspired	  little	  droplets	  of	  sweat.	  A	  feverish	  spread	  across	  his	  eyes.	  She	  was	  relieved	  that	  
the	  ceremony	  was	  over.	  The	  coffin	  was	  hoisted	  up	  and	  carried	  out	  of	  the	  church.	  The	  crowd	  
of	  mourners	  slowly	  funneled	  out	  of	  the	  opened	  archway	  to	  pay	  their	  respects	  to	  the	  family	  
of	  the	  departed	  standing	  by	  the	  door.	  	  
The	  little	  boy	  was	  on	  the	  verge	  of	  delirium.	  He	  walked	  like	  a	  phantom	  beside	  his	  
mother.	  She	  was	  silent	  and	  stared	  straight	  ahead	  clutching	  her	  purse	  between	  her	  arms	  for	  
comfort.	  He	  pulled	  on	  his	  mother’s	  black	  skirt	  to	  get	  her	  attention.	  The	  tugs	  were	  too	  weak	  
for	  her	  to	  notice.	  His	  fingers	  tried	  to	  claw	  a	  portion	  of	  the	  fabric	  but	  failed	  to	  even	  get	  a	  grip.	  
With	  nothing	  to	  hold	  onto	  he	  could	  barely	  maintain	  his	  strength.	  
They	  approached	  the	  doorway.	  A	  whiteness	  erased	  everything	  around	  him.	  He	  was	  
floating	  above	  the	  crowd,	  dying,	  already	  gone,	  his	  spirit	  extracted	  from	  the	  little	  hold	  he	  
had	  on	  life.	  
His	  mother	  heard	  him	  hit	  the	  ground	  behind	  her.	  	  	  	  
“Darling?”	  She	  turned	  around.	  “Oh	  God!”	  She	  screamed	  in	  the	  high	  pitch	  of	  a	  frantic	  
mother.	  A	  man	  behind	  her	  grabbed	  the	  little	  boy’s	  frail	  body	  and	  lifted	  him,	  his	  head	  
unconscious	  in	  the	  crease	  of	  the	  man’s	  elbow.	  His	  feet	  dangled	  limply	  in	  the	  air.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

64	  	  	  	  	  
	  

They	  reached	  the	  bereaved	  family	  members	  standing	  on	  the	  front	  steps.	  Their	  
moaning	  stopped	  when	  they	  saw	  the	  little	  boy.	  Somebody	  yelled	  for	  a	  doctor.	  His	  father	  
noticed	  and	  ran	  towards	  the	  scene	  to	  gather	  the	  boy	  in	  his	  own	  arms.	  	  
The	  little	  boy’s	  eyes	  opened.	  The	  heaviness	  about	  him	  floated	  away.	  	  
He	  could	  hear	  the	  birds	  singing	  their	  afternoon	  song.	  The	  image	  of	  the	  bleeding	  man	  
finally	  ceased	  its	  hold	  on	  him.	  	  
~Icicles~	  
	  

One	  had	  fallen	  on	  her	  when	  she	  was	  girl	  so	  she	  warned	  her	  little	  boy	  to	  mind	  the	  

overhangs	  on	  buildings.	  Don’t	  walk	  directly	  below	  the	  icicles	  because	  sometimes	  they	  fall	  
and	  the	  higher	  up	  they	  are	  the	  worse	  the	  outcome,	  she	  told	  him	  with	  a	  kiss	  before	  she	  sent	  
him	  out	  the	  front	  door	  one	  winter	  morning	  before	  school.	  	  
	  

She	  remembered	  the	  pain	  in	  her	  head	  as	  if	  it	  had	  happened	  yesterday.	  She	  was	  

sixteen	  or	  seventeen	  years	  old	  the	  day	  she	  made	  her	  way	  to	  the	  river	  with	  her	  father.	  They	  
stopped	  at	  the	  corner	  store	  before	  walking	  the	  remaining	  two	  miles	  to	  the	  frozen	  water.	  
They	  needed	  to	  pick	  up	  some	  shiners.	  The	  little	  minnows	  would	  hopefully	  inspire	  the	  pike	  
to	  bite.	  
	  

Her	  father	  carried	  the	  fishing	  poles	  on	  top	  of	  his	  bony	  shoulder	  made	  soft	  from	  the	  

layers	  of	  wool	  he	  wore	  to	  keep	  him	  warm.	  They	  sat	  on	  a	  bench	  beside	  the	  hole	  he	  had	  cut	  in	  
the	  ice	  the	  previous	  week.	  She	  pinched	  a	  live	  one	  between	  her	  fingers.	  It	  squiggled	  until	  she	  
stuck	  it	  on	  the	  sharp	  hook.	  	  
	  

She	  had	  grown	  accustomed	  to	  the	  cold	  over	  the	  past	  couple	  of	  years.	  Now	  that	  her	  

two	  brothers	  had	  left	  home	  she	  was	  the	  sole	  companion	  for	  her	  father	  on	  these	  outings.	  Her	  
mother	  was	  too	  ill	  to	  step	  outside	  let	  alone	  sit	  in	  the	  cold	  for	  hours	  on	  end.	  	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

65	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Bitter	  though	  his	  attitude	  could	  be,	  she	  loved	  the	  stories	  from	  her	  father’s	  childhood.	  

He	  too	  had	  sat	  beside	  his	  own	  father	  and	  listened	  to	  stories	  from	  his	  time.	  Back	  then	  there	  
was	  no	  electricity,	  no	  radio;	  the	  town	  was	  deaf	  to	  anything	  but	  rumors	  and	  stories	  that	  
stuck	  around	  because	  of	  their	  ability	  to	  entertain	  endlessly.	  	  
	  

She	  daydreamed	  during	  her	  father’s	  spouts	  of	  silence	  about	  pies	  she	  wanted	  to	  bake	  

when	  she	  got	  home.	  The	  root	  cellar	  was	  close	  to	  empty.	  Potatoes	  and	  canned	  beans	  were	  
the	  main	  staples	  of	  their	  diet	  each	  winter.	  There	  were	  a	  couple	  of	  jars	  of	  raspberry	  
preserves	  she	  had	  saved	  for	  her	  friend’s	  birthday,	  but	  there	  was	  no	  sugar	  at	  all,	  syrup	  was	  
their	  only	  sweetener,	  and	  her	  mother	  always	  threw	  a	  fit	  when	  she	  used	  it	  for	  one	  of	  her	  
pies.	  The	  winter	  was	  tiring.	  She	  longed	  to	  go	  blackberry	  picking,	  longed	  to	  scrape	  her	  legs	  
against	  the	  barbed	  wire	  she	  hopped	  over	  to	  reach	  the	  trail	  on	  the	  other	  side	  of	  the	  pasture.	  	  
	  

With	  an	  hour	  or	  so	  left	  of	  sunlight	  they	  made	  their	  way	  back	  to	  town.	  	  Traditionally,	  

they	  stopped	  at	  Harry’s	  for	  hot	  milk	  with	  honey	  to	  take	  the	  sting	  away	  from	  her	  dry	  throat	  
and	  a	  whisky	  to	  cure	  her	  father’s	  achy	  bones.	  	  
	  

It	  all	  happened	  very	  fast.	  Instead	  of	  hot	  milk	  she	  received	  a	  cold	  piece	  of	  ice	  for	  the	  

bump	  on	  her	  head	  and	  a	  ride	  home	  in	  Harry’s	  creaky	  buggy.	  It’s	  a	  good	  thing	  her	  father	  had	  
already	  made	  his	  way	  into	  the	  bar	  because	  she	  had	  stopped	  to	  talk	  to	  a	  drunkard’s	  son	  who	  
had	  caught	  her	  attention	  before	  the	  icicle	  fell.	  Her	  father	  would	  have	  cared	  more	  about	  her	  
ending	  up	  with	  a	  boy	  of	  his	  making	  than	  the	  dagger	  shaped	  icicle	  looming	  twenty	  feet	  
above	  her	  skull.	  	  
~The	  Bouquet~	  
	  

He	  was	  late.	  The	  bastard.	  He	  was	  always	  late.	  There	  should	  be	  some	  sort	  of	  protocol	  for	  

messengers.	  This	  guy	  had	  a	  knack	  with	  the	  ladies	  that	  never	  got	  him	  farther	  than	  the	  
	  

	   	  
	  
66	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
whorehouses	  along	  the	  busy	  avenue.	  There	  was	  always	  a	  doll	  offering	  discounts	  to	  the	  
pretty	  faced	  boy.	  
	  

	  He	  was	  definitely	  a	  boy.	  He	  doubted	  if	  the	  boy	  ever	  held	  or	  even	  shot	  a	  pistol,	  but	  oh	  

yes	  he’d	  handled	  women	  before,	  women	  of	  all	  walks	  of	  life;	  he’d	  had	  his	  way	  with	  all	  the	  
breeds.	  	  
	  

Sure	  he’d	  been	  in	  some	  fights,	  and	  yes,	  he	  could	  defend	  himself.	  His	  knuckles	  and	  

biceps	  were	  stealthy	  from	  his	  childhood	  as	  a	  port	  man’s	  son.	  It	  was	  easy	  to	  lose	  a	  hand	  
working	  in	  the	  yards	  unloading	  cargo	  and	  stacking	  old	  ladies	  trunks	  stuffed	  full	  of	  China	  
and	  spices	  from	  the	  Far	  East.	  A	  worker	  learned	  to	  move	  fast	  and	  the	  strong	  ones	  did	  not	  
last	  long.	  	  
	  

He	  finally	  saw	  the	  messenger	  walking	  down	  the	  block	  towards	  him	  with	  a	  bouquet	  of	  

roses	  propped	  in	  his	  arms	  like	  an	  infant.	  It	  was	  just	  as	  he’d	  thought;	  the	  young	  man	  had	  
kept	  him	  waiting	  for	  some	  preposterous	  reason.	  Roses.	  Unbelievable.	  	  
	  

“These	  are	  for	  you	  old	  man,”	  he	  beamed.	  His	  face	  was	  not	  as	  handsome	  when	  he	  smiled.	  

For	  some	  reason	  his	  face	  was	  only	  pleasing	  in	  moments	  of	  intensity	  or	  heavyset	  anger.	  
	  

“Just	  give	  me	  the	  papers,”	  he	  responded	  flatly,	  every	  ounce	  of	  amusement	  gone	  from	  

his	  voice.	  	  
	  

“Looks	  like	  its	  gonna	  rain	  eh?”	  The	  messenger	  looked	  up	  and	  around	  in	  a	  moment	  of	  

unearned	  procrastination.	  	  
	  

“Stop	  dicking	  around	  boy.	  You	  don’t	  want	  to	  head	  down	  that	  road	  with	  me.”	  

	  

“Take	  the	  roses	  sir.”	  He	  paused.	  “Take	  the	  roses	  and	  I’ll	  quit.”	  The	  boy	  was	  serious.	  He	  

reached	  for	  the	  bouquet.	  The	  fragrant	  flowers	  reminded	  him	  of	  his	  wife.	  Each	  night	  she	  put	  
rose	  oil	  on	  her	  face,	  hands,	  and	  feet.	  Suddenly	  he	  longed	  for	  her.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

67	  	  	  	  	  
	  

When	  he	  met	  her	  she	  was	  flawless	  and	  simple.	  Ten	  years	  prior,	  after	  years	  of	  being	  

alone,	  people	  wondered	  why	  he	  did	  not	  have	  a	  wife.	  His	  father’s	  fortune	  was	  soon	  to	  be	  his	  
and	  there	  were	  many	  women	  willing	  to	  become	  an	  heiress	  to	  the	  unspoken	  amount	  of	  his	  
inheritance.	  He	  had	  only	  known	  women	  to	  be	  unnatural	  around	  him.	  They	  were	  tense	  and	  
expectant	  of	  nothing	  more	  than	  the	  width	  of	  his	  wallet.	  He	  was	  miserable.	  Nearing	  the	  age	  
of	  thirty	  his	  father	  passed	  away	  and	  he	  became	  the	  man	  all	  knew	  he	  would	  be.	  	  
	  

Partially	  afraid	  of	  being	  hunted	  for	  his	  money	  and	  bored	  to	  his	  bones	  of	  the	  society	  he	  

had	  put	  up	  with,	  he	  disappeared	  after	  the	  funeral.	  Rumors	  of	  his	  adventures	  trickled	  their	  
way	  back	  to	  New	  York.	  Riding	  camels	  in	  Egypt,	  skiing	  in	  the	  Alps,	  drinking	  with	  expatriates	  
in	  Paris,	  courting	  Princesses	  and	  Duchesses,	  witnessing	  the	  newest	  inventions	  after	  his	  
return	  from	  Europe	  at	  the	  World’s	  Fair	  in	  Chicago.	  His	  colleagues	  wondered	  what	  exactly	  
he	  was	  in	  search	  of	  and	  what	  ideas	  he	  held	  for	  the	  future	  of	  the	  vast	  family	  empire.	  	  
	  

He	  spotted	  her	  on	  the	  second	  day	  of	  the	  fair.	  Tired	  of	  the	  hour-­‐long	  sit	  down	  meals	  and	  

repetitive	  banter	  of	  men	  seeking	  the	  solutions	  to	  modern	  day	  politics,	  he	  decided	  to	  
wander	  among	  the	  vendors	  selling	  children’s	  trinkets	  and	  memorabilia	  to	  look	  for	  
something	  to	  eat.	  The	  smell	  of	  roasting	  meat	  and	  short	  bread	  guided	  him	  in	  her	  direction.	  	  
	  

Standing	  in	  a	  mess	  of	  a	  booth	  selling	  apple,	  blackberry	  and	  strawberry	  pies,	  her	  grace	  

was	  apparent	  despite	  the	  poverty	  she	  had	  come	  from.	  Her	  mother	  sat	  in	  a	  wicker	  chair	  
behind	  her	  too	  frail	  to	  stand.	  The	  eyes	  the	  distraught	  woman	  went	  blank	  as	  she	  clenched	  
the	  sides	  of	  her	  seat	  in	  some	  kind	  of	  daytime	  nightmare.	  	  
	  

Despite	  the	  sickly	  woman,	  he	  calmly	  asked	  for	  the	  price	  of	  her	  pies.	  Her	  voice	  was	  

sustained	  in	  its	  softness.	  He	  introduced	  himself	  and	  she	  gave	  her	  name	  with	  downcast	  eyes.	  
He	  reached	  out	  his	  hand	  for	  a	  proper	  handshake	  and	  startled	  her.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

68	  	  	  	  	  
	  

She	  did	  not	  know	  she	  would	  be	  his	  wife	  but	  he	  knew.	  He	  knew	  immediately	  after	  she	  

wiped	  her	  hand	  on	  her	  stained	  apron	  and	  shook	  his	  hand.	  Something	  strangely	  familiar	  
about	  her	  grip	  gave	  him	  the	  confidence	  that	  this	  woman	  would	  be	  his	  life	  long	  companion.	  	  
	  

Friendly	  to	  every	  customer,	  she	  greeted	  the	  strange	  man	  amiably	  only	  because	  she	  

needed	  to	  sell	  as	  many	  pies	  as	  she	  could.	  He	  dressed	  in	  fine	  cottons	  and	  silk	  and	  wore	  a	  
gold	  ring	  on	  his	  pinky	  finger.	  It	  was	  her	  first	  encounter	  with	  a	  wealthy	  man.	  She	  was	  shy	  
and	  studied	  him	  slowly.	  He	  bought	  two	  of	  her	  pies	  and	  returned	  the	  following	  few	  days	  for	  
more.	  
	  

Over	  the	  next	  few	  visits	  he	  realized	  she	  was	  of	  a	  simple	  kind.	  Not	  like	  the	  women	  he	  

had	  known.	  She	  told	  him	  stories	  of	  rivers	  and	  seas	  that	  she	  had	  read	  about	  and	  asked	  him	  if	  
he	  had	  visited	  any	  of	  the	  places	  she	  spoke	  of.	  He	  had	  heard	  of	  them	  but	  had	  only	  visited	  a	  
few	  that	  she	  mentioned.	  Her	  desire	  to	  see	  the	  world	  excited	  him.	  	  When	  he	  told	  her	  he	  had	  
indeed	  visited	  the	  Nile	  and	  the	  swamps	  at	  the	  end	  of	  the	  Mississippi	  her	  composure	  turned	  
from	  a	  hunched	  girl	  into	  a	  woman	  ready	  to	  face	  the	  world.	  	  
	  

The	  scent	  from	  the	  roses	  reminded	  him	  that	  his	  wife	  was	  expecting	  him	  to	  join	  her	  out	  

for	  dinner	  that	  evening.	  Thanking	  his	  olfactory	  glands	  for	  reminding	  him,	  he	  turned	  and	  left	  
the	  pretty	  boy	  in	  his	  discoveries	  of	  the	  scent	  of	  a	  different	  kind	  of	  woman.	  	  
	  

He	  would	  present	  his	  wife	  with	  the	  roses	  upon	  his	  arrival,	  a	  small	  token	  of	  his	  

appreciation	  for	  all	  she	  had	  dealt	  with	  over	  the	  past	  few	  years.	  He	  knew	  he	  had	  changed	  but	  
did	  not	  want	  to	  speak	  of	  it.	  	  
	  

The	  restaurant	  was	  almost	  completely	  empty.	  He	  headed	  straight	  to	  the	  men’s	  room	  

with	  the	  flowers	  and	  locked	  himself	  into	  a	  shit	  stall	  to	  remove	  the	  papers	  from	  their	  
wrapping	  place	  around	  the	  thorny	  stems.	  A	  thick	  piece	  of	  pink	  paper	  hid	  the	  scribbled	  

	  

	   	  
	  
69	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
message.	  It	  was	  just	  as	  he	  had	  predicted.	  The	  time	  had	  come	  for	  everything	  to	  crash.	  He	  
ripped	  the	  papers	  up	  and	  threw	  them	  into	  the	  toilet.	  
	  

He	  washed	  his	  hands	  and	  carried	  the	  roses	  out	  with	  clean	  hands.	  He	  noticed	  his	  wife	  

across	  the	  room.	  Sneaking	  up	  behind	  her,	  he	  laid	  a	  tender	  kiss	  on	  the	  back	  of	  her	  neck.	  She	  
turned	  to	  face	  the	  man	  who	  seemed	  more	  a	  stranger	  than	  her	  husband.	  He	  smelled	  foul	  as	  
he	  embraced	  for	  the	  first	  time	  in	  months.	  	  
~Rules~	  
	  

He	  grew	  into	  an	  obedient	  child.	  The	  rules	  his	  mother	  and	  father	  ordained	  in	  the	  house	  

followed	  him	  wherever	  he	  went.	  Good	  manners	  were	  a	  habit.	  Please	  and	  thank	  you	  
preceded	  and	  followed	  his	  spoken	  desires.	  He	  washed	  before	  each	  meal,	  scrubbed	  his	  teeth	  
before	  bed,	  and	  combed	  his	  hair	  every	  morning.	  If	  he	  spilled	  or	  made	  a	  mess	  of	  any	  kind,	  he	  
cleaned	  up	  after	  himself.	  When	  a	  stain	  appeared	  on	  his	  pressed	  shirts	  he	  felt	  he	  would	  
betray	  his	  nanny	  if	  he	  did	  not	  press	  the	  spot	  with	  club	  soda.	  	  
	  

He	  was	  made	  fun	  of	  by	  his	  schoolmates	  because	  he	  was	  as	  habitual	  as	  a	  seventy-­‐year-­‐

old	  man.	  At	  lunch	  his	  routine	  was	  always	  the	  same:	  he	  unrolled	  his	  napkin,	  folded	  it	  on	  his	  
lap,	  polished	  his	  silverware	  with	  large	  exhales	  of	  breath,	  kept	  his	  back	  straight	  and	  elbows	  
close	  to	  his	  body,	  and	  held	  his	  knife	  in	  his	  right	  hand	  to	  feed	  himself	  neatly	  with	  the	  fork	  in	  
his	  left.	  Potato	  chips	  and	  cookies	  were	  never	  in	  his	  knapsack.	  Instead	  pasta	  and	  salads	  
accompanied	  his	  sandwich.	  Like	  every	  other	  boy,	  brownies,	  cookies,	  and	  occasionally	  
lemon	  squares	  made	  up	  the	  sweet	  end	  of	  his	  meal.	  	  
	  

On	  most	  days	  his	  mother	  wrote	  finely	  printed	  messages	  on	  his	  paper	  napkin.	  They	  

were	  reminders	  of	  his	  afterschool	  appointments,	  their	  plans	  for	  the	  weekend	  or	  a	  poem	  she	  
would	  think	  up.	  The	  little	  boy	  found	  joy	  in	  these.	  He	  sat	  alone	  at	  the	  end	  of	  the	  long	  wooden	  
	  

	   	  
	  
70	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
table	  and	  in	  his	  loneliness	  the	  napkin	  he	  lifted	  from	  his	  lap	  smelled	  of	  her	  and	  reassured	  
him	  he	  was	  not	  as	  alone	  as	  he	  felt.	  The	  few	  times	  when	  he	  did	  try	  to	  sit	  with	  others	  the	  
discomfort	  of	  wondering	  if	  what	  he	  said	  was	  what	  he	  would	  say	  if	  he	  were	  confortable	  kept	  
him	  from	  speaking	  naturally.	  What	  came	  out	  were	  jumbles	  of	  stories	  he	  thought	  would	  
entertain	  them.	  He	  had	  trouble	  digesting	  his	  meal	  because	  he	  put	  so	  much	  pressure	  on	  
himself	  to	  fit	  in.	  The	  rest	  of	  the	  afternoon	  his	  stomach	  would	  complain	  and	  he	  would	  have	  
no	  energy	  to	  think.	  His	  assignments	  were	  poorly	  done	  and	  his	  mood	  was	  in	  the	  gutter	  by	  
the	  time	  he	  got	  home	  to	  do	  this	  or	  that	  or	  whatever	  his	  mother	  had	  planned	  for	  him.	  He	  was	  
conditioned	  to	  sit	  alone	  everyday	  when	  the	  hour	  struck	  for	  lunch.	  	  
	  

One	  particular	  day	  he	  was	  eating	  a	  delicious	  cheese	  and	  tomato	  sandwich	  when	  a	  

sneaky	  boy	  snatched	  the	  napkin	  out	  of	  his	  lap	  and	  screamed	  his	  mother’s	  message	  out	  loud	  
for	  the	  entire	  dining	  hall	  to	  hear.	  He	  read	  in	  a	  mocking	  womanish	  voice:	  “Dearest,	  today	  will	  
be	  our	  afternoon	  together.	  Let’s	  go	  to	  the	  Zoo!	  I	  love	  you	  from	  my	  heart	  all	  the	  way	  to	  
desolate	  Kalamazoo,	  your	  mother.”	  The	  boy	  howled	  with	  laughter	  holding	  his	  belly	  as	  he	  
doubled	  over.	  He	  waved	  the	  napkin	  over	  his	  head	  in	  his	  other	  hand.	  The	  laughter	  spread	  
quickly	  and	  the	  teachers	  were	  alarmed	  but	  did	  not	  try	  to	  control	  anything.	  The	  little	  boy	  
stared	  at	  his	  sandwich	  no	  longer	  hungry.	  He	  put	  his	  food	  down	  and	  lowered	  his	  head.	  Anger	  
entered	  his	  chest	  and	  he	  stood	  up	  and	  walked	  slowly	  over	  to	  the	  boy	  with	  his	  napkin.	  He	  
straightened	  up	  from	  his	  laughing	  fit	  and	  prepared	  his	  stance	  to	  backfire	  whatever	  the	  trick	  
might	  have	  inspired	  his	  victim	  to	  say.	  	  
	  

“Your	  mother	  is	  a	  hag	  and	  you	  her	  bastard,”	  the	  little	  boy	  yelled	  before	  he	  threw	  a	  

sloppy	  punch	  at	  the	  bully’s	  head.	  His	  nose	  cracked	  and	  blood	  poured	  over	  his	  mouth	  and	  
onto	  his	  shirt.	  Both	  hands	  flew	  to	  his	  mouth	  in	  shock.	  The	  napkin	  was	  thoroughly	  drenched	  

	  

	   	  
	  
71	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
with	  blood	  after	  a	  few	  seconds.	  Both	  hag	  and	  bastard	  were	  clearly	  heard.	  The	  teachers	  
rushed	  towards	  the	  two	  boys.	  The	  cursing	  had	  shocked	  them	  more	  than	  the	  fighting.	  	  
	  

The	  little	  boy	  felt	  a	  strange	  enjoyment	  when	  his	  knuckles	  hit	  the	  boy’s	  face.	  It	  was	  the	  

first	  time	  anger	  had	  given	  him	  such	  a	  rush.	  He	  immediately	  wanted	  more	  and	  began	  to	  hit	  
the	  boy	  anywhere	  he	  could.	  The	  punches	  he	  received	  in	  return	  felt	  strangely	  fulfilling.	  The	  
pain	  introduced	  him	  to	  his	  true	  potential.	  He	  felt	  new;	  something	  was	  knocked	  loose	  within	  
him	  he	  did	  not	  know	  existed.	  	  	  
	  

Dried	  blood,	  scratches	  and	  teeth	  marks	  were	  his	  metals	  of	  honor	  as	  the	  little	  boy	  sat	  

outside	  the	  headmaster’s	  office.	  His	  stomach	  growled	  but	  his	  ego	  was	  full.	  	  He	  had	  defended	  
himself	  and	  proven	  that	  he	  was	  capable	  of	  something.	  He	  did	  not	  care	  whether	  friends	  
would	  come	  of	  it	  or	  more	  enemies	  and	  he	  could	  not	  have	  cared	  less.	  His	  face	  hurt	  when	  he	  
smiled	  which	  made	  him	  smile	  even	  more.	  His	  heart	  was	  still	  racing	  as	  the	  fight	  played	  over	  
and	  over	  again	  in	  his	  mind.	  The	  bully	  managed	  a	  few	  good	  rounds	  on	  his	  face	  and	  his	  left	  
eye	  was	  swollen	  and	  black.	  The	  animalistic	  biting	  and	  scratching	  entered	  the	  scene	  towards	  
the	  end	  and	  was	  by	  far	  the	  little	  boy’s	  favorite	  part.	  The	  taste	  of	  the	  other	  boy’s	  blood	  was	  
no	  different	  than	  his	  own.	  Having	  never	  tasted	  another	  person’s	  blood,	  he	  realized	  the	  bully	  
was	  probably	  enjoying	  the	  fight	  just	  as	  much	  as	  him	  so	  he	  opened	  his	  eyes	  wide	  and	  fought	  
with	  all	  his	  strength.	  It	  took	  the	  teachers	  ten	  minutes	  to	  pry	  the	  two	  boys	  apart.	  	  
	  

The	  stern	  looking	  secretary	  motioned	  for	  him	  to	  enter	  the	  headmaster’s	  office.	  He	  

strode	  by	  her	  with	  the	  buoyancy	  of	  a	  knight.	  Her	  audible	  scoff	  did	  not	  make	  him	  falter.	  He	  
looked	  back	  to	  where	  she	  was	  sitting	  and	  responded	  with	  a	  brilliant	  smile.	  The	  blood	  caked	  
in	  the	  corner	  of	  his	  lip	  cracked.	  The	  taste	  of	  blood	  gave	  him	  even	  more	  gusto	  to	  face	  the	  
anger	  waiting	  on	  the	  other	  side	  of	  the	  door.	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

72	  	  	  	  	  
	  

He	  had	  never	  been	  in	  the	  headmaster’s	  office.	  It	  reminded	  him	  of	  his	  father’s	  study	  at	  

first	  glance	  until	  he	  realized	  his	  father’s	  smelled	  of	  fresh	  cigars	  and	  the	  desk,	  rugs,	  and	  
window	  shades	  were	  much	  finer.	  This	  thought	  made	  the	  little	  boy	  respect	  the	  headmaster	  
less.	  He	  was	  bald	  and	  overweight	  in	  comparison	  to	  his	  father.	  He	  wondered	  whether	  his	  
father	  would	  be	  proud	  of	  the	  fight	  he	  gave	  today.	  	  
	  

“You	  have	  disrupted	  the	  peace	  of	  our	  community	  yet	  you	  smile	  as	  if	  nothing	  has	  

happened.”	  The	  little	  boy	  stared	  him	  straight	  in	  the	  eye,	  unashamed.	  “I	  am	  proud	  of	  our	  
school’s	  reputation	  for	  sending	  fine	  young	  men	  and	  women	  out	  into	  the	  world	  to	  defend	  
honor	  and	  truth.	  Today	  you	  have	  disobeyed	  our	  morals	  and	  made	  a	  disgrace	  of	  yourself.”	  
He	  picked	  up	  a	  wooden	  ruler.	  “Before	  I	  was	  headmaster	  of	  this	  institution	  I	  was	  a	  teacher	  
for	  twenty	  years	  and	  there	  were	  only	  a	  few	  situations	  that	  forced	  me	  to	  beat	  a	  child	  for	  
misbehaving.	  I	  believe	  a	  violent	  punishment	  does	  not	  teach	  a	  violent	  student	  to	  become	  less	  
so.	  Your	  punishment	  will	  be	  mentally	  severe.	  You	  will	  be	  placed	  on	  probation	  for	  a	  week	  
and	  when	  you	  return	  to	  school	  you	  will	  spend	  twelve	  hours	  a	  day	  catching	  up	  on	  your	  
schoolwork.	  You	  will	  arrive	  at	  seven	  and	  leave	  at	  seven.	  Catching	  up	  on	  your	  assignments	  
will	  make	  you	  fall	  behind	  with	  your	  current	  work	  therefore	  summer	  school	  is	  in	  store	  for	  
you	  young	  man.	  Despite	  your	  family’s	  plans	  you	  will	  be	  required	  to	  stay	  in	  school	  to	  make	  
up	  for	  lost	  time.	  Is	  this	  understood?”	  He	  breathed	  in	  deep	  after	  such	  a	  speech.	  The	  little	  boy	  
said	  nothing.	  “Have	  I	  made	  myself	  clear?”	  	  
	  

“What	  if	  I	  keep	  from	  falling	  behind?”	  The	  little	  boy	  pushed.	  The	  headmaster	  tilted	  his	  

head	  in	  disbelief.	  “If	  I	  manage	  to	  catch	  up	  will	  I	  prove	  that	  summer	  school	  would	  be	  
pointless?	  If	  I	  catch	  up	  sir,	  will	  you	  still	  send	  me	  to	  summer	  school?”	  The	  little	  boy	  hated	  

	  

	   	  
	  
73	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
the	  idea	  of	  a	  summer	  without	  trips	  to	  the	  ocean.	  He	  had	  always	  been	  a	  good	  student.	  He	  
would	  prove	  to	  this	  dumb	  man	  that	  he	  was	  capable	  of	  such	  progress.	  	  
	  

“Only	  educated	  men	  are	  respected	  in	  this	  world.	  You	  come	  from	  a	  highly	  educated	  

family,	  one	  that	  would	  be	  greatly	  disappointed	  if	  you	  failed	  to	  follow	  my	  advice.	  There	  is	  
much	  to	  learn	  in	  the	  world	  beyond	  academia	  but	  there	  are	  many	  rings	  to	  jump	  through	  
before	  you	  are	  awarded	  the	  title	  of	  a	  man.”	  	  
	  

The	  little	  boy	  was	  awfully	  confused.	  He	  wanted	  to	  go	  home	  to	  hear	  the	  advice	  of	  his	  

own	  father.	  If	  his	  family	  was	  so	  respected	  then	  why	  did	  he	  have	  to	  prove	  anything	  to	  
anyone?	  Wasn’t	  his	  name	  enough?	  
~A	  Rough	  Encounter~	  
	  

	   The	  little	  boy	  turned	  the	  corner	  on	  his	  way	  home.	  He	  saw	  his	  father	  getting	  out	  of	  a	  

sleek	  black	  car.	  Two	  other	  heads	  popped	  out	  of	  the	  vehicle.	  The	  three	  of	  them	  stood	  outside	  
the	  entrance	  to	  his	  building.	  He	  could	  see	  one	  man	  making	  large	  gestures	  with	  his	  hands	  
while	  his	  father	  stood	  listening	  with	  no	  expression.	  The	  car	  pulled	  up	  the	  block	  and	  waited.	  
Their	  bodies	  were	  exposed	  now.	  The	  two	  men	  stood	  a	  good	  distance	  from	  his	  father	  and	  
peered	  at	  him	  as	  if	  he	  was	  a	  diseased	  man.	  He	  wondered	  what	  they	  were	  telling	  him.	  
	  

He	  tried	  his	  best	  not	  to	  be	  seen	  as	  the	  little	  boy	  inched	  his	  way	  slowly	  towards	  them.	  

Crouched	  like	  a	  boy	  begging	  for	  spare	  change,	  he	  listened	  to	  the	  scene	  from	  behind	  a	  
flowerpot.	  He	  stayed	  there	  long	  enough	  for	  the	  blood	  to	  gather	  uncomfortably	  in	  his	  hands.	  
The	  tingling	  in	  his	  feet	  began	  to	  throb.	  To	  his	  right	  the	  cool	  clay	  of	  the	  flowerpot	  pressed	  
against	  his	  skin.	  It	  was	  refreshing.	  He	  leaned	  his	  head	  against	  it	  and	  rested	  his	  weight	  on	  his	  
side.	  Now	  he	  looked	  like	  a	  crippled	  boy	  faint	  from	  days	  of	  begging	  with	  nowhere	  to	  go.	  A	  
mother	  with	  her	  baby	  carriage	  spotted	  him	  and	  began	  to	  talk	  to	  him.	  He	  shook	  his	  head	  and	  
	  

	   	  
	  
74	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
urged	  her	  onwards	  saying	  he	  didn’t	  want	  her	  help.	  She	  was	  flustered	  and	  did	  not	  want	  to	  
upset	  him	  further.	  She	  glanced	  for	  a	  moment	  at	  the	  escalating	  conversation	  between	  the	  
three	  men.	  	  	  	  
	  

The	  little	  boy	  could	  hear	  snippets	  of	  the	  conversation.	  The	  men	  wanted	  something	  

from	  his	  father.	  They	  kept	  referring	  to	  it	  as	  “Spicer’s	  half”	  saying	  it	  was	  unfair	  of	  him	  to	  
negate	  the	  promise	  he	  had	  made	  a	  month	  before	  when	  they	  “took	  out	  old	  Hickox”	  for	  him.	  
The	  little	  boy	  peeked	  around	  the	  pot	  when	  he	  heard	  the	  name.	  His	  father	  looked	  down	  at	  
the	  ground,	  smiled	  and	  laughed	  the	  loudest	  he	  had	  ever	  heard	  him	  laugh	  before	  he	  burst	  
into	  a	  series	  of	  movements	  hitting	  the	  man	  in	  the	  stomach,	  temple	  and	  jaw	  with	  impressive	  
speed	  and	  precision.	  The	  tail	  of	  his	  suit	  followed	  his	  movements	  like	  the	  flowing	  skirt	  of	  a	  
ballerina.	  The	  other	  man	  threw	  himself	  on	  his	  father.	  The	  little	  boy	  ran	  yelling	  towards	  the	  
scene.	  When	  he	  saw	  his	  son	  running	  towards	  him	  he	  grabbed	  the	  raving	  man	  around	  the	  
shoulders	  and	  whispered	  something	  in	  his	  ear.	  The	  man	  looked	  at	  the	  little	  boy	  who	  stood	  
staring	  at	  them	  with	  anger	  in	  his	  eyes	  and	  fear	  in	  his	  stance.	  He	  nodded	  letting	  his	  guard	  
down	  and	  turned	  around	  to	  where	  the	  other	  man	  lay	  on	  the	  sidewalk.	  He	  threw	  the	  arm	  of	  
his	  unconscious	  friend	  around	  his	  neck,	  whistled	  to	  the	  car	  and	  was	  gone	  in	  a	  matter	  of	  
seconds.	  
	  

“What	  you	  witnessed	  just	  now	  has	  made	  you	  more	  of	  a	  man.	  Unfortunately	  I	  did	  not	  set	  

the	  best	  example,”	  his	  father	  said	  as	  he	  straightened	  his	  clothes	  and	  smoothed	  down	  his	  
hair.	  He	  guided	  his	  son	  inside.	  “Remember	  when	  we	  spoke	  about	  the	  heartbroken	  buck?”	  
The	  little	  boy	  nodded.	  “A	  man	  needs	  to	  defend	  those	  he	  loves.	  He	  has	  to	  fight	  for	  the	  well	  
being	  of	  his	  family.	  It	  is	  a	  selfish	  misguided	  if	  act	  you	  act	  out	  only	  out	  of	  anger.	  Those	  men	  
were	  threatening	  the	  well	  being	  of	  people	  I	  care	  about.	  People	  I	  consider	  as	  priceless	  as	  you	  

	  

	   	  
	  
75	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
and	  your	  mother.	  Do	  you	  understand?”	  They	  were	  inside	  the	  building	  now.	  The	  elevator	  
cast	  moving	  shadows	  across	  his	  father’s	  torso.	  
	  

He	  father	  slid	  the	  iron	  door	  open	  and	  motioned	  for	  the	  little	  boy	  to	  exit	  before	  him.	  

They	  stood	  in	  the	  corridor.	  The	  mechanics	  of	  the	  elevator	  clicked	  as	  it	  made	  its	  way	  back	  
down	  to	  the	  main	  floor.	  	  
	  

“One	  more	  thing,”	  he	  said	  sounding	  more	  and	  more	  ordinary	  and	  normal,	  the	  glimpse	  

of	  power	  fading	  from	  him,	  “don’t	  tell	  your	  mother	  what	  you	  saw.	  It	  will	  cause	  her	  to	  worry	  
and	  she	  has	  been	  fighting	  a	  cold	  all	  week.”	  	  
	  

“I	  won’t,”	  the	  little	  boy	  said	  with	  a	  wince,	  the	  cut	  on	  his	  lip	  cracked	  and	  started	  to	  bleed.	  

His	  father	  took	  out	  his	  handkerchief	  and	  pulled	  him	  into	  the	  light.	  	  
	  

“It	  seems	  more	  than	  one	  fight	  has	  taken	  place	  today.	  Am	  I	  right?”	  The	  little	  boy	  blotted	  

his	  lip	  and	  looked	  at	  the	  floor.	  His	  father	  inspected	  his	  cuts	  and	  bruises.	  He	  was	  surprised	  
when	  he	  saw	  the	  bite	  marks	  on	  his	  arm.	  
	  

The	  little	  boy	  spoke	  quickly	  almost	  choking	  on	  his	  words.	  “I	  fought	  to	  defend	  myself.	  

Another	  boy	  made	  fun	  of	  me	  in	  front	  of	  everyone	  at	  lunchtime.	  I	  couldn’t	  stand	  it	  anymore,”	  
he	  looked	  to	  his	  father	  hoping	  his	  expression	  was	  one	  of	  forgiveness	  and	  understanding,	  
instead	  he	  frowned	  and	  took	  out	  his	  pocket	  watch	  to	  check	  the	  time.	  	  
	  

“Something	  has	  just	  come	  to	  my	  attention.	  Go	  clean	  yourself	  up	  and	  start	  your	  

schoolwork.	  Tell	  mother	  I	  won’t	  be	  back	  in	  time	  for	  supper.”	  He	  opened	  the	  door	  for	  his	  son	  
and	  patted	  him	  inside.	  He	  turned	  around	  and	  rushed	  down	  the	  stairs	  with	  no	  time	  to	  wait	  
for	  the	  elevator.	  The	  little	  boy	  shut	  the	  door	  behind	  him	  and	  sank	  to	  the	  floor	  hugging	  his	  
knees	  to	  his	  chest	  before	  the	  tears	  began	  to	  flow.	  His	  mother	  found	  him,	  bathed	  him,	  and	  
put	  him	  to	  bed.	  He	  was	  home	  three	  hours	  late.	  She	  sent	  for	  Nora	  to	  fetch	  the	  doctor.	  There	  

	  

	   	  
	  
76	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
was	  no	  time	  to	  hear	  his	  story.	  The	  little	  boy	  was	  pampered	  and	  fussed	  over	  as	  if	  he	  had	  
been	  missing	  for	  weeks.	  	  
~The	  Punishment~	  
	  

When	  she	  was	  her	  son’s	  age	  a	  beating	  was	  the	  usual	  punishment	  for	  an	  ill	  doing.	  

Depending	  on	  the	  severity	  of	  the	  incident	  the	  number	  of	  strikes	  were	  less	  or	  more.	  She	  
found	  herself	  in	  trouble	  only	  a	  few	  times	  throughout	  her	  childhood.	  She	  took	  all	  the	  blame	  
when	  she	  cheated	  on	  her	  math	  homework	  with	  her	  best	  friend’s	  help.	  She	  was	  struck	  ten	  
times	  with	  the	  ruler	  in	  front	  of	  the	  class.	  A	  couple	  years	  later	  she	  stole	  a	  classmate’s	  frog	  he	  
had	  brought	  in	  for	  show	  and	  tell	  and	  kept	  in	  in	  her	  desk	  until	  recess	  so	  she	  could	  run	  down	  
to	  the	  river	  and	  return	  it	  to	  where	  it	  belonged.	  The	  boy	  was	  distraught	  in	  a	  frantic	  search	  
for	  his	  pet.	  When	  the	  teacher	  informed	  the	  class	  about	  the	  boy’s	  every	  right	  to	  be	  upset	  she	  
couldn’t	  help	  but	  speak	  up	  for	  the	  frog’s	  sake.	  The	  teacher	  told	  her	  the	  frog	  was	  not	  her	  
property	  and	  she	  did	  not	  have	  the	  right	  to	  decide	  its	  fate.	  She	  suffered	  the	  punishment	  for	  
stealing:	  twenty	  strikes.	  	  
	  

She	  witnessed	  the	  gruesome	  possibilities	  of	  a	  severe	  beating	  when	  her	  brothers	  acted	  

out.	  Their	  blistered	  palms	  looked	  like	  bubbling	  lava	  fields	  and	  they	  yelped	  out	  in	  pain	  when	  
reaching	  or	  grabbing	  or	  opening	  something.	  Her	  mother	  was	  too	  removed	  to	  care,	  whereas	  
her	  father	  was	  in	  a	  constant	  state	  of	  disturbance	  because	  the	  boys’	  idleness	  opened	  more	  
opportunities	  for	  them	  to	  misbehave.	  	  	  
	  

Her	  little	  boy	  was	  not	  seriously	  hurt.	  The	  bite	  marks	  were	  what	  concerned	  the	  doctor	  

most.	  His	  skin	  was	  broken	  in	  a	  couple	  of	  places	  so	  all	  the	  necessary	  precautions	  were	  taken.	  
The	  boy	  suffered	  through	  a	  series	  of	  minor	  operations	  in	  order	  to	  open	  the	  wound	  and	  send	  
fresh	  blood	  into	  the	  area.	  Although	  he	  didn’t	  show	  any	  sign	  of	  discomfort,	  the	  doctor	  gave	  
	  

	   	  
	  
77	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
him	  small	  doses	  of	  medicine	  to	  take	  the	  pain	  away.	  After	  a	  couple	  of	  days	  he	  was	  up	  and	  
around.	  	  
	  

His	  mother	  noticed	  a	  drastic	  change	  in	  him.	  He	  no	  longer	  immersed	  himself	  in	  the	  

games	  he	  used	  to	  play.	  He	  did	  not	  care	  about	  the	  neatness	  of	  his	  room	  or	  the	  quality	  of	  his	  
manners.	  When	  he	  spoke,	  which	  was	  becoming	  more	  and	  more	  rare,	  he	  spoke	  in	  short	  
disturbing	  phrases.	  
	  

One	  night	  when	  she	  was	  hosting	  a	  dinner	  party,	  he	  came	  downstairs	  in	  his	  pajamas	  and	  

entered	  the	  dining	  room	  with	  a	  soiled	  bottom.	  He	  screamed	  at	  the	  group	  and	  showed	  his	  
accident	  in	  full	  view	  to	  the	  eating	  guests.	  It	  was	  the	  first	  time	  she	  had	  the	  urge	  to	  beat	  him.	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

The	  little	  boy	  was	  left	  alone	  in	  his	  room	  with	  no	  thoughts	  or	  imaginings	  to	  speak	  of.	  	  	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

78	  	  	  	  	  
	  

Stolen Hats
A woman sits on a stool center stage with a tall coatrack beside her. Hanging on
the coatrack are many kinds of men’s hats.

When she places a particular hat on her head she becomes that lover from her
past. Her voice matches his accent and mannerisms to a T. When she takes the
hat off she is herself.

Hanging in no particular order among the other hats are:
A Yankee baseball cap
A furry explorer’s hat
A tall stovepipe hat like the one Abe Lincoln wore
A beret with splotches of paint on its rim

She is a different woman with all of them, yet with no shame she entertains her
audience as she shares the secret blunders of each relationship as well as the
comical confusions inherent between a man and a woman.

The Yankee Baseball Cap

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

79	  	  	  	  	  
	  

WOMAN

(To the audience) George was a man of considerable height, about 6’2. His jaw
was stern and his voice strong. His eyes were the kind of blue that made you
forget everything i.e. forget the world has billions of people, that we’re killing
some two thousand species a day and dumping six billon tons of carbon into the
atmosphere a year. Those eyes! I couldn’t stop gazing into them. I liked the
woman I was in those eyes.

Georgie, as I called him—he spoke in more of a yell than anything. By day he was
a social worker, by night a pot smoker and beer drinker. A family man looking to
start a family. But taking his time ‘cause men can do that. Women, we can take
our time too but if we’re too slow we have to be able to sprint at the end.

I met him when I was weighting tables at this shit hole in Philly. Right after I met
him they closed the place down. I swear I never saw so many rats come out of a
drain at once. It would be months before I didn’t have a nightmare where rats
were crawling all over me.

It’s funny. George was a kind of rat in the end. He always sniffed around and once
he was gone I could still feel the tingles from his wiry body as if a rat tail had just
slid across my skin.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

80	  	  	  	  	  
	  

GEORGE

Hey baby you know what I need right now? I need a woman to take care of me so
I can take care of her. It’s a 50/50 relationship. I’ve lived lonesome and I’ve lived
with women and neither has worked out. It’s all about finding the right balance.
That’s what its all about. Finding a balance.
WOMAN
(A bit disgusted) How many women have you been with?
GEORGE
The first woman I was with was ten years my senior. She was always at the
bodega I used to go to bum a cig every now and then. That was before I was
eighteen. She would wander around the neighborhood with nothing to do. And we
got to know each other. She was like a mother to me. Givin’ me my cigs and beer.
She provided for me. And then she taught me to make love. Course it was painful
when she called it off because I got used to her but you know what she said to
me? She told me that everything ends, alls we gotta do it enjoy the moment. Live
to the fullest. Love with an open heart and let go without looking back. A good
motto but easier said than done.

After Linda, I experimented with some girls my age but they were like a 2-foot
deep kitty pool. I could see right through ‘em ya know? Straight to the bottom.
Wasn’t any mystery, wasn’t any excitement. Course they put me on a pedestal
immediately because I made them so comfortable like they was in their own

	  

	   	  
	  
81	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
bedroom. I knew what to do with ‘em, how to make ‘em purr. But a woman needs
more than that. Especially you baby.
WOMAN
How do you know what I need? And answer my question, how many women have
you been with?
GEORGE
Cause I know you. I know you better than you know yourself. I know what you
need before you can even put words to it. I am your telepathic man baby.

(He rolls up his sleeves) It’s like this—when I met you I was in a bad place and
you reminded me of what I had forgotten. Shit I need you more than anyone I’ve
ever known. And I would do anything, anything to keep you.

(He shakes his head) Women are like money baby. Some men work really hard
for them and others just have them. Me, I’ve always had women but not many of
them satisfy me. Just the card I was dealt. I am a specific type of guy and I need
one woman to be everything for me. And that’s you baby.
WOMAN
(To the audience) George was stupid for wanting what he did with me. He was
passionate in his laziness and I knew that 50/50 rant was bullshit. He was a man
who needed a woman to be the mother of his kids and a mother to him. And that
was not going to be me.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

82	  	  	  	  	  
	  

GEORGE

How does this feel baby? Does that feel good? (Moans are exaggerated. He makes

disgusting sexual expressions with his face)
WOMAN
(To the audience) This that. That this. What a way to drive a woman insane. The
thrill is gone when a man repeatedly asks if he is pleasing you. He should be able
to tell. A real lover can understand without words.

There were times when he was everything I wanted and I saw my future in his
eyes. I can see it now—a small white picket fenced house in the suburbs. Two kids
running around with the dog on the lawn. Calling them in for supper. George
would come home from work and find me fitting a newly made dress on little
Annalee. He’d tell me all about the season tickets he scored with his boss for the
family. And I’d be happy. I’d be happy if I was dumb to anything other than a
family and a man obsessed with baseball.
GEORGE
What were you doing last night?
WOMAN
I went out for a drink after work to take a load off. What? Am I breaking some
sort of law here? You know we’ve talked about this before. I need my
independence. I can’t have you worried all the time.
GEORGE
Who were you with?

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

83	  	  	  	  	  
	  

WOMAN

My gosh! Am I some sort of prisoner of yours? I was with some friends; you
probably know all of them. And you probably don’t like any of them. (Laughs)
Good god this is miserable. Come here baby let me show you what your doing to
me. (She pulls down the top of her shirt on her left side to reveal her chest, but

does not expose her breast) You are sucking all the love and hope from my heart.
You are pushing me further and further away from you. Do you want to do this to
me?
GEORGE
No. I don’t. I just want you to be honest with me. I want you all for myself.
WOMAN
Honest? Honest? Now I am being told that I am lying to you? Well this is
impossible.

(To the audience) I left him without saying goodbye. It was raining in the middle
of the night. I woke up, slipped out of bed, and hailed a cab. I left a lot of my stuff
there. But less is more. And it all would have reminded me of him anyway.

(BREAK)

	  

	   	  
	  
	  
The Furry Explorer’s Hat

	  
	  

84	  	  	  	  	  
	  

WOMAN
Rudolf was of Scandinavian descent. I was so in love. He looked like a prince with
his long golden hair. His features were so delicate at times he looked like a
woman, a big tall strong woman that is.

He was genetically designed to withstand cold weather. His beard, as yellow and
bright as sunlight, was thick and protective. His arms were muscular and
supportive, a perfect pillow for my head. He gave me warmth during those frigid
winter months we were together.

He was never cold! It was shocking. On more than one occasion he would wake up
sweating underneath the down comforter. We came upon a sleeping arrangement
where I was covered with the blanket and he was exposed, but we always slept
touching somewhere: my pinky toe against his big toe, my hand on his back, his
arm slouched over my raised hip, my head nestled in his armpit or lost in his
hairy chest. I think that tiny bit of connection spread fire into my blood. I had
never felt so warm and happy.

When spring came he was eager to head north. He told me it had nothing to do
with me; he was simply not a hot weather type of guy. So I told him I would go
with him. I had never been north of Bar Harbor, Maine.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

85	  	  	  	  	  
	  

RUDOLF

My darling you have no place up there. Besides you’d be cold and miserable the
whole time.

When I was a boy, my father always told me women had no place among the
wolves of our family. My mother was a hearty woman, but even she could not
have survived the trips he took to the Arctic—
WOMAN
But women have more body fat than men. It seems like women should be the ones
to venture up north. It’s mean of you to say I wouldn’t survive and besides I
would have you to keep me warm!

(To the audience) Oh how I loved him. He took me to another place, a place where
fairies really exist, where waterfalls curtain their hidden kingdoms, and flowers
close to hide them from a seeking human.

But he did not want me to follow him. Perhaps he would have left me to die if I
had.

It would have happened something like this—I fall behind because I realize I left
my sunglasses in the igloo we stayed in the night before. I scream ahead to Rudy
but he cannot hear me. My eyes begin to water from the sun reflecting off the
snow. I can no longer see where I am going. It becomes harder and harder to

	  

	   	  
	  
86	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
follow him. I hit a bump and my sleigh suddenly flips over. I am flung off course,
knocked unconscious, and remain so for a few hours. Rudy comes to look for me
but the impending snow has covered my tracks. The dogs find him eventually but
cannot lead him to me, and even if he did find me I would have already be dead.
Rudolf would shed a tear but continue northwards.

He thought I understood why he was leaving.
RUDOLF
I seek another world, a world beyond the northern lights. It’s out there I tell you.
Men have always let beauty distract them. But what is behind the beauty? I will
find whatever it is that lays beyond the beyond.

(He whispers) My grandfather spoke of portals. He told me his greatest secret
once. He had fallen in love with an Inuit on one of his early expeditions. He tried
to marry her for a year until her father took her from him by forcing her to enter
another world. He gave up his search for her and returned south. He made me
swear not to tell anyone. All he left me was one piece of advice: beware when the
full moon shines bright upon the snow, not all portals will lead you to another
world, some may guide you to your death.

Oh it’s a search for the devil and his brother but I have to go. I will not be able to
survive a journey like the one I am craving when I am an old man. Darling, look

	  

	   	  
	  
87	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
at me. Please. I have shared my heart with you and you have shared yours with
me but a sure way to kill something is to hold on to it too tightly.

The truth is I have already let you go. I said goodbye after we first met because I
knew I would have to leave once the frosts melted and the birds began to sing.

For generations my family has explored the farthest corners of the northern
world. It’s in my blood. Don’t think for a second this has anything to do with you.
It’s plain and simple. I just have to get out of here.
WOMAN
(To the audience) If I pleaded suicide or a surprise pregnancy he would not have
stayed. Nothing could have made him stay. His will was too strong, his spirit too
nomadic.

After he left I was freezing. Even when summer rolled around and the air was as
hot Hera’s breath, I shivered as I made my way to and from my weekly errands.
When I went to work I wore at least three layers. People thought I was one of
those chronically sick people, with SARS or something. My breathing was
shallow because my chest was weak from so much crying, I constantly had a
tissue pressed against my nose and I could not control my sobs. I didn’t want to
scare people with a sudden out burst of snot!

	  

	   	  
	  
88	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
My friends were all waiting for the day I would meet some hero to save me. They
told me how horrible I looked, assured me he was not Rudolf the red nosed
reindeer who would guide me in the dark; he was Rudolf who couldn’t tell his own
gonads from those of his sleigh dogs.

I know it’s pathetic. And I was young, entirely too young to be so sad. Alas, time is
the ultimate healer. Although she passes slowly, her steady hand did heal my
emptiness.

(She pauses and then bursts out dramatically) What is love but the smoothing
out of a crumbled piece of paper? It opens us up to be written on, imprinted and
colored in.

(She shakes her head) Unjustly, ink fades just as love does. Nothing lasts forever.

(BREAK)

The Stovepipe Hat
MARC
Oh my love, my sweet everlasting beauty; I have your heart in my heart.
Goodness how can love be hot with pleasure but burn with incredible pain? Ah,
but the pain leaves me wanting more of you. You rip my soul from the world but

	  

	   	  
	  
89	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
at the same time you give me such life. You fill me to the top and let me burst
with a chance to love again. Oh I pray this cycle never ends.

(He lights a cigarette and inhales deeply) I used to be so afraid of that word.
Never. Now I use it in all of poems. Never will I ever forsake such a word, ever no,
not ever, never, never, never. Oh I love the shapes of the sounds in the word: the
way the tongue curls at the top of the mouth right behind the teeth in the
beginning and then collapses allowing the front teeth to rest gently on the bottom
lip until the lips push out to end with gusto. Never. What a word!

I want to name my first child Never. He or she will be proud of such a name.
When I call to her in the street people may think I am yelling the answer to a
despicable question. The tone will help them sense it is a name. The calm
question… Never? Where are you? Oh Never darling? Do you want to eat rigatoni
for lunch Never?

Or discussing Never with friends in conversation: that all depends on how well
Never is doing with his schoolwork, I will not be placing him in the tennis
competition until I know his studies are solid or Never always listens to her
father, sometimes she has trouble getting out of bed in the morning, but who
doesn’t as a child? Growing children need lots of sleep!

	  

	   	  
	  
90	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
I also feel strongly about the name Love. Never and Love. They could be opposites
or exactly the same thing. Think about it, Love and Never. These are my
children, this is Love and this is Never.

Love is over used today as a word whereas Never rains fear wherever it is
spoken. Love is the universal opener and Never is the black hole that sucks up
chance and fate. To say “I will never this or never that” completely cuts off the
possibility of manifesting anything close to everything associated with what the
person has just said they would never do or never try.

I never expected to meet you that day in Hudson. I was entirely out of my
element in the thrift store looking at suits with Harry. What a shock, on a trip
with Harry in Hudson where I meet the woman of my wildest dreams! I know I
scared you popping out between the rows of hanging clothes, but I wanted to
leave an impressionable dent in your memory.

Marry me? (pause) No? Then marry me tomorrow? (pause) Marry me at some
point along this miserable line of life? Good God I cannot sustain myself without
you! Here I am, saying what every man swears he will never admit, but all know
is true: love completes a man. Without a woman, without a lover, without
someone to share in this misery, we are nothing. We might as well be an empty
vessel sailing with the white flag of surrender waving above our heads, our guts

	  

	   	  
	  
91	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
exposed, our swords blunt from poking at stone enemies. Oh it’s all a game, the
glories of a man. The chains he wears to pay for sins he has not committed.

(He lights another cigarette even if the other one is not finished) I spent years
repenting for the mistakes of my father’s generation. The disrespect and
mistreatment my mother suffered was second handedly forced onto me as she
raised me. Each time my father expected the impossible from her, I was the one
who suffered the consequences. It is not fair of my father to have treated her so,
but he could not help it. A wife is not a slave to be ordered around, expected to
hold her tongue and obey all rules. She needs freedom as much as she needs air
to breath.

In my first few relationships I hid behind the guilt I had built up over the years. I
discarded my feelings because I thought if I honestly shared my thoughts I would
dominate the atmosphere. My emotions and desires were a toxic gas that, if
released, would ruin any chance of happiness. As a result of this, one relationship
after another tumbled into disaster until I was so broken I began to see a
therapist. I didn’t think seeing a shrink was going to solve any of my problems. I
thought if anything it would just distract me from getting over the lump I created
in my personality.

But as humans we need to share experiences. Classification is a tool we can use to
spur a realization to take place. After a year or so of therapy I came to

	  

	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
understand that I was not the first to suffer from what was defined as

92	  	  	  	  	  
	  

“Withdrawal Syndrome”. It is basically any form of clinging to past traumas and
using them as a rock to be crushed under instead of using the rock to push off of
in order move on. We become so attached to our suffering; so comfortable in our
misery that when we shed the shell we feel exposed and want to crawl back to
that darkness we know so well.

Enough of this—I am no longer willing to hide. Now that I have a kind-hearted
woman I no longer fear being exposed. I am free now.
WOMAN
(To the audience) Free. I guess.

If Marc had really freed himself he would have realized he was admitting total
attachment to another kind of suffering. He was so attached to the idea of being
free that the idea of being free was the closest he would ever get to actually being
free. But it’s true for all of us. The more we cling to truth the less we have of it.
The more we cling to freedom the less free we are. The more I thought I loved
Marc, the less I actually loved him. It is a complicated conundrum.

It really ticked me off how modern the proposal was. No getting down on one
knee. He didn’t even have a ring! It was more of a spontaneous question than an
offering of a lifelong commitment. I considered marrying him only because I was
tired of dating. Tired of being left or waiting for the right moment to leave and

	  

	   	  
	  
93	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
then having to start all over again. You know what I am talking about. Its all been
said before. After years with the same person it is hard to remember who you
were before him.

(Speaking angry and fast) The dating world is miserable but on the other hand
being single is like walking down the street naked with a sign above your
buttocks that reads, “Imagine what I’ll look like when I am post-menopausal”. It
makes you wish you could deal with all the dull moments it takes to become
intimate with someone, the silences that are necessary to be really comfortable
with a person, the patience required to shed the layers we build up to protect
ourselves.

I hated going to the grocery store, shopping and cooking for one, not having
anyone to go the movies with, not having anyone to take to my cousin’s wedding,
the questions, the horrifying looks on my relative’s faces when I told them I was
alone and just focusing on myself. It gets to a certain point when all your friends
are either getting over a horrible separation, in the middle of a mediocre
relationship, or single and checking their match.com accounts five times a day.

Marc was too passionate. His emotions were overwhelming. There was a voice in
the back of my mind ordering me to run before I tripped over my own foot, before
I made an irrevocable mistake. I told myself—whoa there little firecracker, there

	  

	   	  
	  
94	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
is no such thing as a mistake that can’t be reversed, feel it out a bit, don’t be rash,
and love yourself and the process.

Love the process, hah. What a joke. Marc was a post-menopausal woman. He
knew himself better than most men his age. He wasn’t an alcoholic or a sexaholic.
He spent hours reading the latest diet research to improve not only his body, but
the health and speed of his sperm. He really wanted Never and Love to be born
sooner than later because to him the advantages of being a young father far
surpassed those of being a financially stable older father.

The bottom line was that I just wasn’t ready for marriage. Or maybe it was that
Marc wasn’t the right man for me. As much as I hated the feeling I get when I
know I am about to make a big decision—punching my pillow to get my anger out,
crying alone in my car to NPR— I did not want to be the mother of this lunatic’s
kids. Marc was the worst kind of lover because he thought he was the best. He
was blind to my feelings because he was so in touch with his own. He glossed over
mine to the point where I started to think he had some mental disorder.

I heard he found a nice country girl and knocked her up. I am sure he’s happy
with Never, Love and his wife.
(BREAK)

	  

	   	  
	  
	  
The Beret

	  
	  

95	  	  	  	  	  
	  

WOMAN
(To the audience) The innocent relationships are the simplest ones.

Jack and I, we watched things together. Sat on benches, ate in restaurants, went
to high school drama shows, farmers markets, gallery openings, fashion shows,
bonfires, vegan cookouts, sweat lodges, cult information sessions, played bridge
in old folk’s homes, attended preschool graduations, you name it, we did it.

Jack was always running into friends unexpectedly. They were interesting
people. When I asked him about them later he would shrug it off and say he didn’t
know them well, they were just acquaintances of his from living in New York for
so long.

But I knew what they saw in him. Jack had an eye to absorb and recreate what he
saw with visual perfection. If he were a chef who tasted a dish he would be able to
turn around and recreate it with the exact same ingredients. His steady brush
was equipped with the shape, colors, and mood of a situation so well that he could
paint anything and did. Jack was a master artist of his time, still young, and
incredibly humble.

He was one intimidating guy no doubt. Women were always coming up to him to
greet him rubbing his back asking him how he was faring with his new opening

	  

	   	  
	  
96	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
coming up. I knew they all had had him or wanted him or maybe both. I didn’t
stand by his side and bark at them to get off or spray them with my defense
mechanistic stink. I just wandered around talking to complete strangers to try
and make myself comfortable. Sometimes I just pretended what they said was
funny. Other times I pretended to be funny to try to get a second chance to
impress them. It was shit show. In the end I just wasn’t cool enough for Jack

Or so I thought.
JACK
I am not a Picasso or a Lucian Freud. I don’t paint women and then enjoy them
the next moment in some sort of celebration of artistic achievement! All those
women may think I am that type of artist but I am not.

I am just a guy who is in love with the colors of our world.

When we were children—in the prime of our innocence—we put colors and shapes
together before we named things. The whole world is up for interpretation if you
don’t rush to name everything. If a child points to the sky and asks, “what is
that?” referring to a bird, and you say, “that’s a bird,” then for the rest of his
childhood he will look at a bird just as a bird, nothing else. As he learns more
about the world, he will see a bird and say, “oh I know what that is, that’s a bird”
and move on.

	  

	   	  
	  
97	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
When people look at things all they see is what they want to see, their eyes are
clogged with judgment. That’s why our country is obsessed with hearing about
bad news on CNN. They get some sick enjoyment out of being exposed to other
people’s misfortunes. They like knowing their security systems are beeping and
their dishwashers are scrubbing their grime off for them. CNN gives them a break
from their own reality. I think the solution to the prejudice, the hate, and the
suffrage born from white man’s supremacy is for a person to focus on their
surroundings. If white men were ever content with all that their native landscape
offered them the world would be a much better place.

That’s what art is; it’s an understanding of one’s immediate surroundings. It is an
effort to reach out to others to express an interpretation of that truth. When I
paint I try to share what I’ve learned as I wander down the road of this lifetime.

It took a lot of patience to learn how to mix paints to make a desired color.
Adding just the tiniest amount of the wrong color can ruin the purity of a certain
shade. Just like love, the balance can easily tip to the wrong side. Day after day,
month after month, a painting can have hundreds of layers. This too is true of
love. The older I become the more I grow to understand both painting and love.
Both are slow, arduous journeys that leave me feeling unprotected and
vulnerable. The more I sacrifice for a painting the better it becomes and the more
I sacrifice for a relationship the stronger it becomes.

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

98	  	  	  	  	  
	  

WOMAN

(To the audience) Jack and I were totally satisfied in every scope of our
relationship: how much time we spent with each other, who did what both in the
bedroom and out of the bedroom, who we chose to spend time with when we
weren’t together, how we talked about the relationship to other people, how we
talked about the relationship with one another, how we settled disagreements
and difficult decisions. Everything was perfect until…

One day he comes home, announces he is moving to a Catholic monastery in
Florence, tells me I have to deal with the apartment and the two kittens we
decided to take in together, and informs me he is on a different path.

(To Jack) What path Jack? Are you gonna paint the yellow brick road and see
where it takes you?
JACK
Listen, despite everything I have accomplished, none of it, none of it, is worth
anything. There is a hollow space within me, I am sure you can feel it, an
emptiness that I need to feel out. (pause)
WOMAN
(To the audience) Jack on Jack. Jack all about Jack. Jack and who? Oh Jack and
Jack. Jack Jack Jack Jack yap yap yap yap yap yap yap. Ugh he was entirely
nuts. Jack out of the box insane! I could not believe he had found Jesus at thirty
some years old, at the height of his artistic career, women throwing themselves

	  

	   	  
	  
99	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
at him, me at his side, two adorable tabby kittens, money in the bank! He threw it
all away to worship the religion that persecuted women for thousands of years
for being just as awesome as men? (deep breath) Okay that whole feminist point
may have been pushing it a bit.

My mother was right—life changes as much as the world does, and the world can
change pretty fast. From the times when men worshiped fat little Venus of
Willendorfs to nowadays as they hide away in Monasteries failing to satisfy their
women. It’s just as well I suppose. Jack followed his heart and I eventually found
mine.

(A phone rings in her pocket)

Hey honey. I am picking June up at day care and then I’ll meet you at home?
Would you mind grabbing some bell peppers for the stir-fry? (She walks off

talking) It slipped my mind to pick them up. Oh and also Katie wanted you to…
CURTAIN

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

100	  	  	  	  	  
	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	   	   	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	   	   	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

	   	   	   	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  

101	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

	   	   	  
	   	   	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	   	  
	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	   	  

	  

	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

102	  	  	  	  	  
	  

