Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2012

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2012

Thomas Hardy's Women: An Examination of the
Tragic Heroine
Vivien Ford-Smith
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Ford-Smith, Vivien, "Thomas Hardy's Women: An Examination of the Tragic Heroine" (2012). Senior Projects Spring 2012. Paper 157.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2012/157

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2012 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Thomas Hardy’s Women:
An Examination of the Tragic Heroine

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Vivien Ford-Smith

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2012

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost I would like to express the deepest gratitude for all the support and mental
stability my excellent advisor, Stephen Graham, provided me with throughout this arduous year.
Not only is Stephen an excellent professor, but he has gone above and beyond the expectations
of an advisor: always responding quickly to my numerous emails, providing copious amounts of
notes of feedback, and always keeping a positive outlook towards the final product. Without
you, my project would be a rambling incoherent mess of words and I thank you for everything
you have done.
I have to thank Deirdre d'Albertis and Bradford Morrow for agreeing to be on my board and for
also being two of the most brilliant professors at Bard: you both have cultivated and influenced
my ideas throughout these four years that gave way to this project.
Next I have to thank my friends who provided me with the happiest four years of my life.
Meghan Brady, you have provided me with constant laughter, music, and love: you are
unstoppable and I am so thankful to have you in my life. Caitlin Youngquist, without you I
would not be the person I am today, as corny as that may sound. You have become my sister to
whom I cannot imagine life without and to which Bard would not have been the same; I could
probably write an entire other project on how much your friendship means to me (but I will spare
the reader this). And David Wiley, you have provided me with abundant support and love that
has pushed me to do my best; you are truly a wonderful person that completes my life to the
fullest.
Lastly and most importantly I could not have completed this project without my family. Willie,
in all your bearded, annoying self my life would not have been as exciting if you weren't around
and I would not have worked as hard in order to best you. Mom and Dad, you are the most
important people in my life and have always supported me in everything I have done with no
questions asked; none of this would have been possible without you: this project, Bard, my life.
Not only are you the greatest parents in the world, you are my role models and the most amazing,
intellectual people I know. Thank you for answering my annoying phone calls, putting up with
my messy habits, and providing me with the unconditional love that has kept me going these four
years. This project is for you.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
Chapter 1

1
Far From the Madding Crowd (1874): Two Transformations Towards
an Emotionally Developed Protagonist

8

Chapter 2

The Return of the Native (1878): Denial, Development and Demise

32

Chapter 3

Tess of the d’Urbervilles (1891): Four Transformations Towards
Becoming a Tragic Heroine

54

Jude the Obscure (1895): An Attempt to Demolish the Institution
Of Marriage

78

Chapter 4
Works Cited

100

Works Consulted

101

1

Introduction

Thomas Hardy composed realistic novels in which he explores both the pastoral and
urban settings during the age of modernity in nineteenth-century England.

Through the

exploration of these settings Hardy portrays the effect that they have on his female protagonists.
Hardy begins to investigate the psyche of the female protagonists as they interact with the male
protagonists and the nature that encompasses the novel. Each female character begins the novel
with a unique personality that undergoes different trials and it is how the woman reacts in these
given situations that eventually determines her fate. There are four particular Hardy novels that
embody this concept of the female protagonist: Far From the Madding Crowd (1874), The
Return of the Native (1878), Tess of the d’Urbervilles (1891), and Jude the Obscure (1895).
Each of these novels contains a female protagonist that faces situations that alter her character.
Bathsheba Everdene, Eustacia Vye, Tess Durbeyfield, and Sue Bridehead are the four female
protagonists that will be examined in this project.
As a writer, Thomas Hardy fashions settings in which nature constantly conflicts with
modernity and society, creating a visual and realistic world for the characters: “a world shaped
by an imaginative seeing into nature, human and pastoral, but a world bound no less by hard
material fact, life as it is lived” (Morgan ix). The realism that is present within the novels

2
revolves around society and the social differences that appear for the characters from time to
time. The four female protagonists are therefore placed within the confines of society and
continuously attempt to find an identity in order to accommodate their conventional mores to
social rules and institutions.

All four of the women encounter social differences amongst

themselves and other characters in the novel. Therefore, their consciousness develops through
the perception of others and themselves. In Penny Boumelha’s critical essay on Hardy she states
“There is, throughout Hardy’s fiction, a radical split in women’s consciousness between selfperception and perception by others; it is this latter which gives birth to self-consciousness and to
that concern with the judgment of others which is common to the female characters” (Boumelha,
35), demonstrating her belief that it is the perception of those around the female protagonist and
her awareness of them that molds her self-consciousness.

The female protagonist’s

consciousness of society allows her to constantly attempt to redefine herself in order to either be
included in or apart from it. John Bayley addresses this concept as well stating
[Hardy’s] characters divide into those who are aware…of the conditions which
life seems to demand of them, and of the kind of rewards it offer; and of those
who ‘love it desperately’, however little they may be aware of the fact, and who
are for that reason outside—more or less—the kind of consciousness which Hardy
disposed of… (Bayley 87)
Bayley is addressing the fact that a Hardy character is to some extent conscious of the society
that surrounds them, which creates a division of those who reap society’s benefits and those who
are completely outside of society. For example, I perceive that certain characters use society to
their advantage, such as Bathsheba, in order to gain something out of it.

There are also

characters, such as Eustacia, who are infatuated with one concept of society and because of this

3
cannot penetrate successfully into the society that they are living in. Furthering my and Bayley’s
argument about the character’s awareness of society, there is also a sense of denial and defiance
of the society that each of the women are placed in. For Bathsheba it begins as a denial of the
role a woman is supposed to play within a farming community; Eustacia denies the community
of Egdon Heath to the extent of becoming a recluse; Tess is defiant of what people say about her
having a baby out of wedlock; Sue attempts to avoid and reassess institutions that society has
created.
As mentioned earlier, the settings that Hardy composes in are extremely crucial in
shaping the female protagonist’s character and identity. The women influence the place as well,
for example John Bayley states “The natural, unconscious Hardy seems to know that place has
the only stability, and that human beings are briefly real only when the intentness of the author
focuses them as part of it…We become conscious of place through the presence of the character,
who is not just a convince for Hardy’s ambulant awareness of things” (Bayley 94),
demonstrating the interdependence that place and character have amongst one another. The
interdependence that the four women have with place molds some of their identity: “These
female characters merge together their identity and that of the objects around them” (Boumelha,
35), which transforms the perspective other characters and society may have of them. Nature is
one of the places that one can perceive this Hardy phenomenon in. The four novels delve into
worlds that are heavily influenced by nature. The meaning and influence of nature changes
throughout the three novels, but nevertheless it significantly affects and impacts Bathsheba,
Eustacia, Tess, and Sue.
The nature composed in Far From the Madding Crowd is of the pastoral and astrological
construction, devoid of industrial modernity. Bathsheba encounters animals and weather that

4
contain metaphors and paradoxes in relation to her life. The critic Rosemarie Morgan illustrates
that Bathsheba’s meeting with Farmer Oak and Boldwood occur in agricultural settings while her
encounters with Sergeant Troy take place in “meadows, woods, and fields, as a mirror to
Bathsheba’s sexual temperament, [which] have precisely that fresh, open-air quality that Hardy
sees in her own nature” (Morgan 34). In contrast, Eustacia is placed within a nature that
becomes a character in The Return of the Native. Moments in the novel display Egdon Heath
with seemingly human-like qualities through the way the narrator describes the landscape. It
holds a certain power over Eustacia that is a determining factor in her eventual demise. The
nature in Tess of the d’Urbervilles is relentlessly linked to Tess in ways that cannot be overcome
and is something Tess eventually has to accept. This nature is the purest and most raw form out
of the four novels, indicating a progression in how Hardy’s conception of nature began to evolve.
Hardy began with a purely pastoral nature that eventually evolved into the raw form of nature,
which he directly connected to the female protagonist. Sue is not directly influenced by the
nature found in the other three novels, although Jude is, she is touched by it in a more
metaphorical manner through the character of Arabella and the bird imagery occasionally used to
describe her character. Arabella stands for the carnal and raw aspect of nature that Sue has never
experienced due to the urban life she has lived.
Within these four novels Hardy presents instability from his narrative perspective when
discussing the female protagonists. Hardy carefully creates and molds each of these female
protagonists through the lens of his narrator. The narrator’s voice in each of the four novels is
different and yet is also similar to some extent. In Far From the Madding Crowd the narrator
seems confused about Bathsheba’s character while describing her at certain points in the novel.
The narrator is unable to place her within a fixed point because of her unique interactions with

5
other characters and the actions she performs when in private. This may lead the reader to
confusion about her character, for example Henry James states “we cannot say that we either
understand or like [Bathsheba],” (Lerner 1968, 33) and although James makes a warranted
observation, it is not Bathsheba’s character that the reader is confused by but rather the narrator’s
depiction of her because when Bathsheba speaks one can arguably place her in a specific fixed
point. The narrator in The Return of the Native associates Eustacia with the night, placing her as
a supernatural creature and sometimes displaying a certain disdain towards her because of her
inability to penetrate the society of Egdon Heath. The most unique of Hardy’s narrators appears
in Tess of the d’Urbervilles because of the infatuation that seemingly develops from the narrator
towards Tess. Penny Boumelha observes
all the passionate commitment to exhibiting Tess as the subject of her own
experience evokes an unusually overt maleness in the narrative voice.

The

narrator’s erotic fantasies of penetration and engulfment enact a pursuit, violation,
and persecution of Tess in parallel with those she suffers at the hands of her two
lovers. Time and again the narrator seeks to enter Tess, (Boumelha 120)
further indicating the narrator’s attachment to Tess. The infatuation developed by the narrator
leads “him” to portray Tess in a highly sexualized light even while she remains, according to the
novel’s subtitle, a pure woman. Boumelha goes further to say “she is not merely spoken by the
narrator, but also spoken for. To realize Tess as consciousness, with all that that entails of
representation and display, inevitably renders her all the more object of gaze and of knowledge
for reader and narrator” (Boumelha 120), which is true throughout the beginning of the novel,
but Tess ultimately breaks free of this trope by the end. The narrator of Jude the Obscure keeps
Sue at a distance in such a way that the narrator is simply observing Sue as Jude is. Throughout

6
the beginning of the novel the narrator only portrays Sue through Jude’s eyes and therefore this
creates a similar effect that Bathsheba’s narrator displays, the reader is unsure of Sue and is
surprised when the narrator eventually does relate certain personality traits that do not coincide
with the image of her that has been established.
Throughout the years that Hardy was writing and after, there has been much criticism
devoted to the role of gender in his work. A good summary as to why can be found in Patricia
Ingham’s essay on Hardy, “Hardy was one of those prepared to accept a different construction of
femininity which would rewrite both the ideal woman and her reinforcing opposite, the fallen
woman as well as the New Woman” (Ingham, 140). Although this project is focusing on four
female characters in Hardy’s work, it is not an examination of gender in the four novels. Rather,
I plan on exploring the progression of Hardy’s portrayal of the tragic heroine and whether or not
they are fully realized by the end of novel. The definition of a fully realized tragic heroine for
this project is a woman, placed apart from other women in society, that reaches a moment of
clarity (tragic awareness) and consciousness about the situation she has been dealt. She attempts
to correct her past and gain freedom from the social restraints that have been placed on her,
instead of simply surrendering. Through the woman’s will power to attempt to correct the
wrongs placed on her and reconcile her past, the heroine meets her demise (hence the tragic
aspect) and accepts the outcome. The four novels trace Hardy’s progression of the conception of
the tragic heroine; beginning with the more comedic Bathsheba Everdene and ending with the
tragic break down of Sue Bridehead. I chose to focus on the female protagonist rather than the
male protagonist because it is in the female characters that Hardy portrays the struggle of a
person’s will most clearly.

7
The four female protagonists each develop and transform from the character they begin
as in their respected novels. For three of these woman the change they undergo is not one of
growth but rather decline.

Bathsheba, Eustacia, and Sue each begin as strong-willed and

independent women, often unafraid to speak their own mind, and yet by the end of their
respected novels each of these characters experience a weakening in her character. They each
surrender themselves to both the pressures of society and in ways to the men in their life. This
makes them less realized tragic characters because they simply release their lives to the mistakes
they make and the situations they are placed in. Although Bathsheba reaches a more realized
emotional state by the end of Far From the Madding Crowd, she lacks a completely realized
consciousness. These three protagonists set their fates in motion through actions carried out by
themselves: Bathsheba sends the Valentine to Farmer Boldwood, Eustacia denies Mrs. Yeobright
entrance into her home, and Sue marries Phillotson, which all instigate the eventual outcome in
the woman’s life. Tess is the only character to overcome society to the degree that she reaches a
moment of clarity before her death and she is able to be freely release to her fate. Tess goes
through four transformations that allow her to transcend her problems and attempt to correct her
life outside of the lens of society. Unlike the other women’s hand in their fate, Tess does not
play much of a role in her fate. She is instead affected by the male characters and the universe’s
unraveling of her destiny. As John Bayley states in his “An Essay on Hardy,” “Tess is the most
striking embodiment in literature of the woman realized both as object and as consciousness, to
herself and to others,” demonstrating the woman she is by the end of Tess of the d’Urbervilles.
This project will explore the four female protagonists in relationship to the concept that Tess is
the most fully realized tragic heroine out of Hardy’s women.

8

CHAPTER 1
Far From the Madding Crowd (1874): Two Transformations Towards an
Emotionally Developed Protagonist

In Far From the Madding Crowd, Thomas Hardy presents a rustic and pastoral world that
is almost completely devoid of modernity, focusing instead on the natural world. The natural
world presented is separate from the later novels because the land and the people are untouched
by urbanization and the movement towards an industrial future. The female protagonist that
shapes the novel is Bathsheba Everdene, a confident and attractive woman who has a completely
different outcome from the subsequent three Hardy women. The narrator identifies Bathsheba’s
qualities that separate her from other women and is unable to actually place Bathsheba in a
specific category. The narrator places her in between two established points containing both
male and female qualities.

Bathsheba’s fate does not end in either an actual death or a

metaphorical death like the other female protagonists, but rather a marriage and prospect for a
happier life. However, Bathsheba slowly descends from an independent, self-reliant, and often
vain, character to a lesser woman than she had previously been. Bathsheba becomes a woman
who conforms to what society expects of her, such as marriage and the dependence on a male
figure to run the business. Although Bathsheba does not lose her sanity like Eustacia and Sue,

9
she also does not reach the evolved mindset and tragic awareness of Tess. Bathsheba simply
forgoes her previous independent lifestyle upon meeting Sergeant Troy and once he dies she
realizes that she can never return to her self-reliant lifestyle again. Yet, as Bathsheba releases
her independent personality she eventually reaches a level of awareness about her emotional
state that allows her clarity in perceiving her life. Bathsheba is similar to Tess in that she
undergoes two significant transformations to reach a moment of clarity in her life, yet she is not a
tragic heroine since the novel ends happily.
Bathsheba begins the novel as an emotionally underdeveloped girl seeking forms of
attention. The first introduction to Bathsheba that the reader receives is through the gaze of the
male protagonist Gabriel Oak, a local farmer and shepherd in the village. A young woman
drives through in a wagon and happens upon a package that contains a small mirror “in which
she proceeded to survey herself attentively. She parted her lips and smiled” (5). Both Gabriel
and the reader have to question why the woman is performing this action, the narrator then
states:
[W]hether the smile began as a factitious one, to test her capacity in that art,—
nobody knows; it ended certainly in a real smile…. There was no necessity
whatever for her looking in the glass…. She simply observed herself as a fair
product of Nature in the feminine kind, her thoughts seeming to glide into far-off
though likely dramas in which men would play a part—vistas of probable
triumphs—the smiles being of a phase suggesting that hearts were imagined as
lost and won. Still, this was an odd conjecture, and the whole series of actions
was idly put forth as to make it rash to assert that intention had nay part in them at
all. (6)

10
The passage demonstrates that even the narrator is unsure of the woman’s smiling, wondering
whether it began as a real smile or a false one, but knowing it ends as a true one. She becomes
aware of her own self before anything else and seems to realize what she is doing, hence the
reason she blushes. There is no purpose in looking in the mirror except to gaze at her own
reflection, which is likened to an offspring of Nature, linking Bathsheba to the natural world that
surrounds her. The narrator suggests that perhaps the woman is daydreaming about fantasies in
which men defend her honor, but the narrator then backtracks this statement in the last sentence
implying that one cannot assume this is what the woman is daydreaming about. The fact that the
narrator is unsure of the woman’s actions suggests that this character is both complex and
slightly mysterious, also demonstrating the narrator’s inability to place Bathsheba within an
established point. The narrator, like the reader, does not yet know enough about the newly
arrived woman to pass judgments on her. However, one can come to the immediate conclusion
that this woman is vain, which is what Gabriel suggests to a man once the woman leaves. She is
looking at simply herself in the mirror, which indicates an act of self-admiration, whether or not
she may be conscious of it.
The next two scenes in which Bathsheba appears in she is riding a horse adorn with a
man’s saddle. The man’s saddle is the backbone to Bathsheba’s qualities that separate her from
other women. The first time she is on the horse with a man’s saddle she is with her aunt and it is
unclear whether she rides it sidesaddle or the right way. Yet, both the aunt and the narrator take
note that her saddle is not a woman’s. The second time Bathsheba passes by on the horse she
performs several different movements that shed more insight on her character. As Gabriel
watches her, the first interesting action that the woman does is “looked around for a moment, as
if to assure herself that all humanity was out of view, then dexterously dropped backwards flat

11
upon the pony’s back, her head over its tail, her feet against its shoulders, and her eyes to the
sky. The rapidity of her glide into this position was that of a kingfisher—its noiselessness that of
a hawk” (14). The woman is aware that what she is doing would be frowned upon if someone
were to see her; hence her checking that no one is around. Her actions in this moment point to a
free woman unafraid of natural elements, such as the horse. This indicates that when Bathsheba
feels like doing something and the moment is right, she will carry out what she plans to do. She
does the movement quickly indicating that this is not the first time she has attempted it and is
seemingly a comfortable position for her to take, even though it is not ladylike in the eyes of
society. The next movement she makes demonstrates more of her character:
The performer seemed quite at home anywhere between a horse’s head and its
tail, and the necessity for this abnormal attitude having ceased with the passage of
the plantation, she began to adopt another, even more obviously convenient than
the first. She had no side-saddle, and it was very apparent that a firm seat upon
the smooth leather beneath her was attainable sideways.

Springing to her

accustomed perpendicular like a bowed sapling, and satisfying herself that
nobody was in sight, she seated herself in the manner demanded by the saddle,
though hardly expected of the woman, and trotted off. (14)
The woman is unafraid of sitting like a man atop a horse, although she is still conscious that what
she is doing would be frowned upon by society. She rides the saddle as it should be ridden and
not as how society would expect her to ride a horse. The word ‘performer’ used to describe
Bathsheba in this moment depicts a woman who is able to play the part and has a connation of
the dramatic in it, a quality that strongly exists within Bathsheba as the novel progresses. There
is also a strong alliteration of the “s” sound that cannot be overlooked in the passage. It suggests

12
a laziness surrounding the woman’s movements placing emphasis on how at ease Bathsheba is in
this moment. The narrator’s analogy between the woman and the sapling is reminiscent of a
scene in Tess of the d’Urbervilles in which Tess is compared to the same object in nature. Here,
the sapling is bowed, suggesting an imbalance and imperfection in Bathsheba’s character in
comparison to Tess, whose own sapling analogy was not bowed over, but rather growing straight
and strong.
As Gabriel watches Bathsheba carry out her chores, the narrator highlights that although
the woman acts in a less charming way than Gabriel thought she might act, she still maintains her
beauty and allure within Gabriel. When Bathsheba notices Gabriel watching her, the narrator
illustrates the reaction of the two characters,
That the girl’s thoughts hovered about her face and form as soon as she caught
Oak’s eyes conning the same page was natural, and almost certain. The selfconsciousness shown would have been vanity if a little more pronounced, dignity
if a little less…she brushed hers with her hand, as if Gabriel had been irritating its
pink surface by actual touch, and the free air of her previous movements was
reduced at the same time to a chastened phase of itself. Yet it was the man who
blushed, the maid not at all. (15)
Upon perceiving Gabriel observing her, Bathsheba instantly assumes that he is assessing her
features, just as she had been doing earlier with the mirror. The narrator states that Bathsheba’s
awareness of this does not imply either vanity or dignity because she portrays just enough selfconsciousness of the situation. This is another instance in which the narrator is unsure where to
place Bathsheba, is she being vain or is she displaying dignity; the narrator cannot pinpoint her
mindset. Bathsheba’s awareness of Gabriel’s gaze changes her previous fast paced and carefree

13
movement to a more humbled and subdued one, displaying her consciousness of how Gabriel
may be viewing her. The last sentence of the passage demonstrates that a man’s gaze does not
embarrass Bathsheba, but rather it is Gabriel who is taken aback by her realization of him,
indicating a gender role reversal. This illustrates Bathsheba’s unintentional disregard for men
and their feelings that is portrayed throughout the novel.
When Gabriel has a conversation with Bathsheba in his hut, she refuses to give her name
to him, indicating both a flirtatious quality and certain power emanating from her. The power
she holds is her ability to withhold her name, even though a man is asking for it, something that
other women would have readily given away. After Gabriel says something to Bathsheba the
narrator states, “she observed in a tone which showed her to be that novelty among women—one
who finished a thought before beginning the sentence which was to convey it” (18), separating
her from other women due to her ability and willingness to process thoughts before speaking.
The narrator clearly believes this is an important quality in Bathsheba and something that defines
her from the other female characters in the novel.
Bathsheba overcomes Gabriel’s thoughts to the degree that he wants to marry her soon
after their meeting. Bathsheba runs after Gabriel to correct her aunt’s statement that she is taken
by another man and when Gabriel directly asks her if she has any men in her life, she replies
“‘What I meant to tell you was only this…that nobody has got me yet as a sweetheart, instead of
my having a dozen as my aunt said; I hate to be thought men’s property in that way, though
possibly I shall be had some day’” (24).

This statement demonstrates that Bathsheba’s

seemingly strong-willed and independent consciousness is aware that she will most likely marry
at some point in her life. She is conscious that marriage is inevitable later in her life and she
enjoys the idea of marriage to some extent, “‘I have tried hard all the time I’ve been thinking; for

14
a marriage would be very nice in one sense. People would talk about me, and think I had won
my battle, and I should feel triumphant, and all that. But a husband…’” (25). Bathsheba is once
again focusing on herself, viewing marriage as a vehicle to gain attention from society and
appear triumphant in life. Yet, the concept of actually having a husband after the wedding does
not appeal to her and makes her question marriage, which is apparent in the ellipsis at the end of
the sentence. Therefore, marriage only appeals to her because of the attention she would receive
from society, demonstrating Bathsheba’s vain aspect of her personality.
Although Bathsheba acknowledges her eventual marriage, throughout the conversation
she repeatedly denies Gabriel’s hand in marriage, illustrating both her flirtation of the possibility
and her want to keep Gabriel around even though she does not love him. For example Bathsheba
mentions her eventual marriage a second time, “‘Well, what I mean is that I shouldn’t mind
being a bride at a wedding, if I could be one without having a husband. But since a woman can’t
show off in that way by herself, I shan’t marry—at least yet’” (25), suggesting again that the
concept of being the center of attention would be enjoyable. Bathsheba says she will not marry;
yet the last three words imply the possibility is not completely ruled out of her mind, although
for Gabriel it is. Bathsheba denies Gabriel consistently and tells him towards the end of their
conversation “‘I want somebody to tame me; I am too independent; and you would never be able
to, I know’” (26). This contradicts Bathsheba’s slight aversion to marriage as well as her
independence. To want to tame one’s independence implies that they are not fully self-sufficient
and are in want of help or companionship to some degree. In Bathsheba’s mind, her eventual
husband, not Gabriel, will be able to rein in her freedom; something subsequent Hardy women
do not look for, demonstrating the evolution of Hardy’s tragic heroine. Bathsheba is also

15
expecting the attention of other men in her future due to the confidence her looks and she wants
to be fought over.
When Bathsheba moves to a new town the villagers, quenching her need for attention,
observe her intently. The reason for the attention given to Bathsheba by the villagers reveals an
attribute of her character that refers back to the man’s saddle and illustrates her authority.
Bathsheba decides to be the master of her own farm, taking on the role a man would normally
carry out. While speaking to her workmen Bathsheba states “‘Now mind, you have a mistress
instead of a master I don’t yet know my powers or my talents in farming; but I shall do my best,
and if you serve me well, so shall I serve you. Don’t any unfair ones among you (if there are any
such, but I hope not) suppose that because I’m a woman I don’t understand the difference
between bad goings-on and good’” (65), illustrating that Bathsheba is in charge of these men and
confident the farm will be a success. Bathsheba lets her workmen know that although she is a
woman, unsure of her farming abilities, she is conscious of the proceedings and business that
make up the working of a farm. The presentation of Bathsheba as mistress of a farm once again
separates her from the more conventional side she portrays while with Sergeant Troy. The
authority she has gained through both the attention and her property marks a transformation in
her character. She has begun to evolve from the vain girl she was into a more independent
figure.
In one of Bathsheba’s first interactions in the village as head of her own farm, the
narrator focuses on the obvious difference between herself and the other farmers at market-day.
The narrator states “Among these heavy yeomen a feminine figure glided, the single one of her
sex that the room contained” (71), identifying Bathsheba as the only woman at the market place.
Her confidence begins to waver upon the realization that she is the only woman in the room, but

16
is soon regained upon remembering how she wants to be perceived by these male farmers, “But
if she was to be the practical woman she had intended to show herself, business must be carried
on, introductions or none, and she ultimately acquired confidence enough to speak and reply
boldly to men merely known to her by hear say” (71). Bathsheba overcomes both her lesser sex
and knowledge of farming in order to speak with the men present in a professional manner,
whether or not they know who she is. However, her gender is still apparent amongst all the men,
especially to the narrator,
Something in the exact arch of her upper unbroken row of teeth, and in the keenly
pointed corners of her red mouth when, with parted lips, she somewhat defiantly
turned up her face to argue a point with a tall man, suggested that there was
potentiality enough in that lithe slip of humanity for alarming exploits of sex, and
daring enough to carry them out. But her eyes had a softness—invariably a
softness—which, had they not been dark, would have seemed mistiness; as they
were, it lowered an expression that might have been piercing to simple clearness.
(71)
The narrator suggests a capability for Bathsheba to overcome her gender and be equal with the
men she is discussing business with. By focusing on Bathsheba’s mouth during this moment of
heated discussion, the narrator places Bathsheba in a sexual light, even though she is attempting
to be defiant and confident amongst the men around her. She will not fully be able to do so
because of her dark eyes containing a softness in them that detracts from her defiant attitude in
the argument with the other male farmer. Her eyes suggest more femininity than if they were
able to achieve a clearer gaze as she argues with those of the opposite sex. The men that are
present with Bathsheba do not seem to sense the potentiality of being their equal that the narrator

17
is portraying. They view her with respect, but not as a threat to the farming community and
themselves. Therefore, the narrator’s viewpoint is unique and reveals Bathsheba in a light that
the other characters never view her as. Similar to the narrator in Tess of the d’Urbervilles, this
narrator seems to admire Bathsheba in a way that places her on a pedestal and attributes certain
traits to her that may not even be present.
Although Bathsheba is conscious of certain things that other women are not, in regard to
people’s emotions and feelings she still remains completely unaware and insensitive. Bathsheba
states to her housemaid, Liddy that “‘we know very well women scarcely ever jilt men; ‘tis the
men who jilt us. I expect it is simply his nature to be so reserved’” (73), demonstrating
Bathsheba’s inability to realize that she jilts Gabriel when he proposes to her. She seemingly
disregards this fact and focuses on the concept that this is usually the man’s job. It is as if she is
unaware that she is capable of doing this to a man while in the presence of another woman. She
further illustrates this insensitivity and unawareness of people’s emotional states through writing
the humorous, yet detrimental valentine to Farmer Boldwood, stamping the letter with a
“MARRY ME.” After she sends the valentine to Boldwood the narrator reveals: “So very idle
and unreflecting was this deed done. Of love as a spectacle Bathsheba had a fair knowledge; but
love subjectively she knew nothing” (77), demonstrating Bathsheba’s lack of knowledge about
the emotional state of love.
Bathsheba’s thoughtless valentine pushes Boldwood, a man who had never been
interested in a woman before, to fall deeply in love with her.

When first observing her,

Boldwood is unable to determine Bathsheba’s attractiveness, but from the moment he is told she
is handsome, Boldwood is unable to control his feelings for her. Bathsheba’s reaction to this is
interesting,

18
It troubled her much to see what a great flame a little wildfire was likely to kindle.
Bathsheba was no schemer for marriage, nor was she deliberately a trifler with the
affections of men, and a censor’s experience on seeing an actual flirt after
observing her would have been a feeling of surprise that Bathsheba could be so
different from such a one, and yet so like what a flirt is supposed to be….She
resolved never again, by look or by sign, to interrupt the steady flow of this man’s
life. But a resolution to avoid an evil is seldom framed till the evil is so far
advanced as to make avoidance impossible. (96-97)
Bathsheba is surprised by Boldwood’s immediate response to the valentine, unable to
comprehend the consequences of her actions. The use of fire imagery to describe the chain
reaction of emotions that the valentine causes demonstrates Bathsheba’s unease of the situation.
The narrator highlights that Bathsheba did not send the valentine in order to gain Boldwood’s
affection or seek him as her husband, doing it simply out of foolishness. If someone were to
place Bathsheba, a woman who is supposedly so different from others, against a flirtatious
woman the narrator states one would not be able to find much of a difference. Bathsheba then
vows to never lead a man on again and play with their emotions, indicating her consciousness of
her part in the situation. Bathsheba was the one to instigate Boldwood’s attraction to her and she
seemingly regrets what she has done. However, the narrator hints that it is too late for Bathsheba
to change her ways and the damage will remain as it is. This leads one to wonder why
Bathsheba craves the attention from men and then denies them, which is something the narrator
focuses on later, “There are occasions when girls like Bathsheba will put up with a great deal of
unconventional behaviour. When they want to be praised, which is often; when they want to be
mastered, which is sometimes; and when they want no nonsense, which is seldom” (130). The

19
quote suggests that Bathsheba wanted this reaction from Boldwood, as well as Gabriel’s earlier
intentions. It illustrates that above everything else, Bathsheba wants to be praised and will do
what she can to gain it. It is also reminiscent of the statement made earlier that Bathsheba
ultimately wants to be fought over by men. Therefore, she reins these men in, denies them, and
then still keeps them around.
Bathsheba’s expression after denying Boldwood points to the concept of the male
attention as a game: “She allowed a very small smile to creep for the first time over her serious
face in saying this, and the white row of upper teeth, and keenly cut lips already noticed,
suggested an idea of heartlessness, which was immediately contradicted by the pleasant eyes”
(100). The small smile that Bathsheba accidentally lets slip through sheds light on her lack of
attempt to change her flirtatious ways. She enjoys the attention Boldwood is bestowing on her
and is glad she was able to ensnare another man to turn down. Yet, her eyes, which are her
downfall when attempting to portray equality amongst men as seen in the market scene, keep her
heartlessness at bay in the moment.
Bathsheba ponders the offer of marriage Boldwood proposes and is able to recognize that
“[The offer] was one which many women of her own station in the neighbourhood, and not a few
of higher rank, would have been wild to accept and proud to publish. In every point of view,
ranging from politic to passionate, it was desirable that she, a lonely girl, should marry, and
marry this earnest, well-to-do, and respected man.” (101). Even though she is aware that the
offer is one that many woman would be happy to have, Bathsheba does not want him as a
husband and this fact is enough reason for her to deny him, indicating that Bathsheba ultimately
wants to marry a man for love. The narrator states

20
It appears that ordinary men take wives because possession is not possible without
marriage, and that ordinary women accept husbands because marriage is not
possible without possession; with totally differing aims the method is the same on
both sides. But the understood incentive on the woman’s part was wanting here.
Besides, Bathsheba’s position as absolute mistress of a farm and house was a
novel one, and the novelty had not yet begun to wear off…. Beyond the
mentioned reasons with which she combated her objections, she had a strong
feeling that, having been the one who began the game, she ought in honesty to
accept the consequences. Still the reluctance remained. (102)
The narrator demonstrates that the want and need to possess are what drive men and women to
marriage. Bathsheba does not need the satisfaction of possession because of her position as head
of a farm. Having the authority over the farm gives Bathsheba the pride and self-worth a woman
may receive in marriage. Once again she feels regret for sending the valentine and sparking
these feelings in the first place. However, she is not regretful to the point of repentance in the
form of marriage to Boldwood. The use of the word “ordinary” illustrates that Bathsheba does
not fall into this category and the narrator is placing her separate from society.
Tess, Eustacia, and Sue’s beauty are described at some points as ethereal, but
Bathsheba’s beauty is compared to a demonic spirit, “Her eyes were at their darkest and brightest
now. Bathsheba’s beauty belonging rather to the demonian than to the angelic school, she never
looked so well as when she was angry—and particularly when the effect was heightened by a
rather dashing velvet dress, carefully put on before a glass” (107). In comparison to the other
ethereal Hardy women, Bathsheba’s beauty described in this moment is the complete opposite.
She is demonic in her appearance rather than angelic and the narrator states that she looks most

21
beautiful when she is angry. This is reminiscent of the evil that the narrator suggests she cannot
undo from herself and paints a darker light on Bathsheba, similar to the smile she reveals after
denying Boldwood.
Once Sergeant Troy enters Bathsheba’s life her character begins to shift from the
independent and uniquely different woman to a more subdued character, marking the first
significant transformation that she undergoes. Sergeant Troy captivates Bathsheba in a similar
way that she affects Farmer Boldwood, creating a role reversal. He awakens her dormant
emotions and sexual state, which opens her up to dependence, jealousy, and love. The reader can
begin to see the change in Bathsheba though subtleties that the narrator reveals, such as “For a
defiant girl, was a faltering way; though, for a timid girl, it would have seemed a brave way to
endure” (141), in responding to Sergeant Troy. Although the way she responds would have
seemed brave for a timid girl, Bathsheba’s defiant personality is seen wavering in this moment
and is seemingly out of place with her personality.
Sergeant Troy demonstrates his dominance over Bathsheba both during and after he
exhibits his sword skills to her. It is in this moment that Bathsheba is subordinate to a man for
the first time in the novel and unaware of the situation she is placed in. Sergeant Troy tricks her
into believing that the demonstration of his sword skills is safe and towards the end of his show
he points the sword at her chest in order to slay a caterpillar. This is a highly sexualized action
that Troy enacts and Bathsheba is not in control of her own movement in the moment, unable to
reverse the role of dominance. She is physically unable to move for fear of being hurt and Troy
has placed himself in the dominant role, similar to rape. Troy then kisses Bathsheba in a
moment of passion reminiscent to Alec d’Urbervilles’ kiss of mastery on Tess, but Troy’s kiss
takes Bathsheba’s breath away. After the kiss the narrator brings the reader’s attention to the

22
affect it has on Bathsheba’s character, “We now see the element of folly distinctly mingling with
the many varying particulars which made up the character of Bathsheba Everdene…. Bathsheba,
though she had too much understanding to be entirely governed by her womanliness, had too
much womanliness to use her understanding to the best advantage” (147). Here the narrator
illustrates Bathsheba’s shift in character from independent to subordinate. Bathsheba previously
did not know love and now it flows through her being. Her thoughtfulness that was celebrated
by the narrator earlier has been overcome by her womanliness after the kiss. Although her
understanding triumphs over her womanliness, in this moment and hereafter her understanding is
replaced by her womanliness. The narrator continues to focus on the loss of her independence
and reveal the difference between Bathsheba and a woman of weaker caliber,
Bathsheba loved Troy in the way that only self-reliant women love when they
abandon their self-reliance. When a strong woman recklessly throws away her
strength she is worse than a weak woman who has never had any strength to
throw away. One source of her inadequacy is the novelty of the occasion. She has
never had practice in making the best of such a condition. Weakness is doubly
weak by being new. (147-48)
Bathsheba’s self-reliance is now her downfall in the face of love because she once knew strength
and now that she has thrown it away Bathsheba is weakened. Her newness to the vulnerability of
weakness is heightened do to her awareness of what independence once felt like.

Her

development in love throws Bathsheba off guard as well, never having felt this way about a man
before. The new found feelings of love that Bathsheba is dealing with lead her to state “‘Loving
is misery for women always. I shall never forgive God for making me a woman, and dearly am I
beginning to pay for the honour of owning a pretty face’” (155). The love that Bathsheba has

23
begun to feel is perceived as a curse for women in her eyes. This leads her to blame God for
making her a woman in the first place and blessing her with beauty. The last sentence is
interesting because it reveals that even though Bathsheba is cursing her womanhood she is still
maintaining her vanity. Although Bathsheba regrets having been born a woman and prone to
love in a harsher way than man, she is still able to praise her sex.
Bathsheba’s newly attained womanhood begins to seep into other parts of her life and
does not solely remain in the hands of Sergeant Troy. As she is talking to Farmer Boldwood, a
man Bathsheba has always maintained strong stance with, the narrator states “Bathsheba, in spite
of her mettle, began to feel unmistakable signs that she was inherently the weaker vessel. She
strove miserably against this femininity which would insist upon supplying unbidden emotions in
stronger and stronger current” (160). Throughout her conversations with Boldwood, Bathsheba
usually portrays superiority towards him. Now that she has transformed into a more subdued
character, her awareness of her femininity is heightened and she becomes the weaker person in
the argument. Bathsheba attempts to smother the femininity that is making her the weaker of the
pair, but her emotional state hinders her from suppressing it. Bathsheba’s emotional state leads
her to tears after this conversation, “With almost a morbid dread of being thought a gushing girl,
this guideless woman too well concealed from the world under a manner of carelessness the
warm depth of her strong emotions. But now there was no reserve” (167). This is a moment of
vulnerability for Bathsheba that she does not want anyone else to witness. Bathsheba’s emotions
overcome her and she is unable to keep them at bay like she has in the past.
After marrying Sergeant Troy, any thought of Bathsheba maintaining her position as head
of her farm is put to rest when he does not listen to her or Gabriel’s warnings about a storm
approaching and instead gives all the workmen alcohol. Bathsheba’s power has been stripped

24
away from her and she appears almost as a completely different character. When Gabriel asks
her why she married Sergeant Troy in the first place, she states “‘between jealousy and
distraction, I married him!’” (200), demonstrating regret in having accepted his proposal. One
has to wonder why it is Sergeant Troy that transforms Bathsheba into a vulnerable and
submissive woman. He is the antagonist of Gabriel and has an unpleasant disposition the
moment he is introduced. Sergeant Troy takes advantage of Bathsheba in ways that neither
Gabriel nor Farmer Boldwood would ever attempt. Therefore, one can reach the conclusion that
his forcefulness and disrespectful nature is what draws Bathsheba towards him. As mentioned
earlier, Bathsheba believes she wants a man that can tame her and subconsciously she views
Sergeant Troy as the man to do it. Unfortunately it is not until the two are married that
Bathsheba finds out Sergeant Troy’s past with her ex-housemaid Fanny and truly realizes his
treachery.
Upon finding a lock of hair that Troy has been keeping with him, Bathsheba has a fit of
jealousy. Troy’s response to her pathetic outburst is “‘Why, Bathsheba, you have lost all the
pluck and sauciness you formerly had, and upon my life if I had known what a chicken-hearted
creature you were under all your boldness, I’d never have—I know what’” (205), illustrating that
Bathsheba is no longer able to argue with a confident attitude. A lock of another woman’s hair
weakens Bathsheba to a state that is feminine and would be unattractive to the woman whom the
reader began the novel with. When Bathsheba finds out that Fanny is dead and Troy realizes his
mistake in marrying Bathsheba instead of Fanny, Bathsheba falls further into a depressed state.
This demonstrates the reliance she has begun to form on Troy and it sickens her to believe that
he could love anyone but herself.

Once Troy leaves Bathsheba, she begins to cry again,

attempting to once again suppress her newly acquired emotional state. The reader then receives

25
Bathsheba’s thoughts about her transformation into this less confident and more reliant woman
through the narrator,
She was conquered; but she would never own it as long as she lived. Her pride
was indeed brought low by despairing discoveries of her spoliation by marriage
with a less pure nature than her own. She chafed to and fro in rebelliousness, like
a caged leopard….Until she had met Troy, Bathsheba has been proud of her
position as a woman; it had been glory to her to know that her lips had been
touched by no other man’s on earth—that her waist had never been encircled by a
lover’s arm. She hated herself now. In those earlier days she had always
nourished a secret contempt for girls who were the slaves of the first goodlooking young fellow who should choose to salute them. She had never taken
kindly to the idea of marriage in the abstract as did the majority of women she
saw about her. In the turmoil of her anxiety for her lover she had agreed to marry
him; but the perception that had accompanied her happiest hours on this account
was rather that of self-sacrifice than of promotion and honour. (217)
Bathsheba recognizes several important instances and feelings that have shaped the character that
she is now. She first recognizes that Troy has conquered her, subduing both her self-reliance and
independence. This has led her to relax in her life and begin to rely on Troy to the extent that she
has let her guard down. The fact that Troy loves another woman and has left her leaves
Bathsheba in a state of anger and confusion. She realizes that his nature is less pure then she
thought it was before marriage and this wounds her pride. Bathsheba admits to hating herself for
letting a man gain control of her life when she had previously been proud no one had been able
to claim her as his own because of her ability to deny. She has now been tarnished by another

26
man and regrets her action in marrying Troy. Bathsheba also regrets having acted like the girls
she looks down upon. Although she was able to deny both Gabriel and Boldwood, she marries
Troy out of desperation and a need to claim him in the way that girls do with “the first goodlooking guy” that interacts with them. Bathsheba views her marriage as one of self-sacrifice on
her part, implying that she sacrificed her independence to maintain her lover.
Bathsheba’s next transformation occurs when she allows Fanny’s coffin to be brought
into her home while the grave is being prepared. The entire chain of events that revolve around
the coffin demonstrate Bathsheba’s displacement and jealousy towards Fanny, while indicating
an out-of-body experience she has.

As Bathsheba strolls about town, she walks “Like a

homeless wanderer she lingered by the bank…She must tread her giddy distracting measure to its
last note, as she had begun it. With a swollen heart she went again up the lane, and entered her
own door” (233), illustrating the role that Fanny has taken in Bathsheba’s life. Fanny has
metaphorically become mistress of Bathsheba’s house, placing Bathsheba as a stranger and
foreigner within her own home. It is as if she becomes homeless in this moment, unsure of how
to proceed with her husband’s dead lover lying in her home. Once Bathsheba returns to her
home, she grapples with the concept of Fanny’s death and past history with Troy. As she is
“standing beside the uncovered coffin of the girl whose conjectured end had so entirely
engrossed her, and saying to herself in a husky voice as she gazed within—‘It was best to know
the worst, and I know it now!’” (234), Bathsheba reveals that it was good for her to know the
history between Fanny and Troy in order to uncover Troy’s true character. Yet, not too soon
after this scene, Bathsheba begins speaking to Fanny in a venomous manner, ‘O, I hate her, yet I
don’t mean that I hate her, for it is grievous and wicked; and yet I hate her a little! Yes, my flesh
insists upon hating her, whether my spirit is willing or no!...If she had only lived, I could have

27
been angry and cruel toward her with some justification; but to be vindictive towards a poor dead
woman recoils upon myself O God, have mercy! I am miserable at all this!’ (235). Bathsheba
wants to hate the woman who has taken her husband’s heart, but she feels cruel for hating
someone who can never defend themselves. Therefore, Bathsheba wishes Fanny were alive so
she could justify her reaction to the history Fanny shared with Troy. Since Fanny is dead,
Bathsheba cannot actually blame her for how she is feeling and this creates confusion as to
where her anger can be directed. Upon realizing this, Bathsheba takes a step back from herself
and assessing her state of mind:
Bathsheba became at this moment so terrified at her own state of mind that she
looked around for some sort of refuge from herself….resolved to kneel, and, if
possible, pray. Gabriel had prayed; so would she. [….] She knelt beside the
coffin, covered her face with her hands, and for a time the room was silent as a
tomb.

Whether from a purely mechanical, or from any other cause, when

Bathsheba arose it was with a quieted spirit, and a regret for the antagonistic
instincts which had seized upon her just before. (235)
Bathsheba becomes frightened by her thought process in the moment and feels the need to do
something with herself in order to escape it. She remembers a time when Gabriel knelt and
prayed, so she attempts the same act by the coffin. This transfers Bathsheba to a state of
calmness and changes her attitude into a less frantic one. Whether or not she was actually
praying, Bathsheba’s meditative state allows her to release the negative thoughts she was holding
against Fanny.

This is the first time Bathsheba has displayed a religious disposition and

demonstrates the confused state of mind she finds herself in. She cannot direct her anger at a
dead girl nor can she at her husband, therefore she turns to God in an attempt to right her mind.

28
This state leads Bathsheba to place flowers around Fanny’s body and in this moment “She forgot
time, life, where she was, what she was doing…. Bathsheba, pallid as a corpse on end, gazed
back at him in the same wild way” (235). She becomes transfixed in her actions and transcends
time through a meditative mindset, similar to the moment in which Tess can transcend her
reality. Therefore, when she perceives Troy watching her, it is as if Bathsheba has joined Fanny
in death due to her unawareness of his presence.
The feeling of peace with Fanny does not last too long and Bathsheba regains her
jealousy upon seeing Troy, as he is about to kiss Fanny’s lips:
‘Don’t—don’t kiss them… You will, Frank, kiss me too!’ …. There was
something so abnormal and startling in the childlike pain and simplicity of this
appeal from a woman of Bathsheba’s caliber and independence…. It was such an
unexpected revelation of all women being alike at heart, even those so different in
their accessories as Fanny and this one beside him, that Troy could hardly seem to
believe her to be his proud wife Bathsheba. Fanny’s own spirit seemed to be
animating her frame…. All the feeling she had been betrayed into showing she
drew back to herself again by a strenuous effort of self-command. (237)
Bathsheba cannot bear to see her husband kiss another woman’s lips and in a moment of
desperation demands Troy to kiss her own lips. The narrator reflects that this moment of
desperation is similar to a child’s pain: Bathsheba has changed so completely from her former
independent self that to see her acting in this way is depressing and immature. The narrator is
shocked by her reaction and seems disappointed that Bathsheba has lost her sense of
independence in this moment. Troy and the narrator come to the realization that all women are
the same internally no matter what they appear to be like from their exterior and the way they

29
hold themselves in society. Fanny and Bathsheba become one in the moment and the two are
indistinguishable from one another. Bathsheba has released all her emotions at once, something
she has never done fully before. Therefore, she attempts to reign them back in, but both the
reader and Troy have already seen that she has lost control. This leads Troy to state that
Bathsheba tempted him through Satan to leave Fanny.
After Fanny is buried, Troy officially leaves Bathsheba and she now has to deal with the
loss of her attachment to him. Bathsheba has lost all the independence and self-reliance she
emanated at the beginning of the novel. Therefore, Bathsheba becomes stagnant in a way falling
in between a death and rebirth transformation.

She begins to reflect on her life and

transformation,
She belonged to him: the certainties of that position were so well defined, and the
reasonable probabilities of its issue so bounded, that she could not speculate on
contingencies. Taking no further interest in herself as a splendid woman, she
acquired the indifferent feelings of an outsider in contemplating her probable fate
as a singular wretch; for Bathsheba herself and her future in colours that no reality
could exceed for darkness. Her original pride of youth had sickened, and with it
had declined all her anxieties about coming years, since anxiety recognizes a
better and a worse alternative, and Bathsheba had made up her mind that
alternatives on any noteworthy scale had ceased for her. (256)
Bathsheba notes her feeling of still belonging to Troy even though he is no longer present. She
feels both relief and surprise at his absence. She no longer contains the vanity and pride that was
so predominately part of her constitution and instead focuses on her eventual fate as a poor,
lonely soul. There is a sense of acceptance in this moment: Bathsheba has accepted her new self

30
and future, no longer worrying about expectations or alternatives in her life. When she finds out
that Troy has drowned, she is the only one who believes he is still alive, demonstrating her
concept that there is no alternative for her future: she will remain Troy’s and therefore he cannot
be dead. This dismal outlook on life places Bathsheba in a subordinated state of being and is in
stark contrast to her previous outlook on life.
It is only when Troy is shot by Boldwood in front of Bathsheba that she comes to terms
with a different outcome. She does not return to her old independent self, but is able to accept
that she is free from Troy, indicating her second major transformation. While Bathsheba is
listening to a children’s choir sing, she regrets everything that she has learnt in life,
She would have given anything in the world to be, as those children were,
unconcerned at the meaning of their words, because too innocent to feel the
necessity for any such expression.

All the impassioned scenes of her brief

experience seemed to revive with added emotion at that moment, and those scenes
which had been without emotion during enactment had emotion then. Yet grief
came to her rather as a luxury than as the scourge of former times. (308)
Bathsheba’s acceptance of herself has allowed her to release her emotions on her own terms.
She envies the children that are unaware of the power and meaning their words hold due to their
innocence.

All her emotions from her past experience cumulate into this one moment of

expression for Bathsheba. She is able to recognize her emotional state for the first time and
carefully dissects her life to feel what she was unable to acknowledge before. The grief she feels
is not punishment but rather relief that she is finally able to give in to her tears and not be
concerned with the weakening of her prideful nature.

31
Bathsheba realizes her loss of independence has been placed in Gabriel. Therefore, when
he decides to leave her, Bathsheba asks him to remain and be her husband. The novel has come
full circle and Bathsheba is completely dependent on the first man she turned down. However,
Bathsheba still maintains some semblance of power since she is the one to ask Gabriel to stay
and he complies. Although the novel ends on a happy note, a parenthetical statement suggests
Bathsheba is still unhappy by her change: “Then Oak laughed, and Bathsheba smiled (for she
never laughed readily now), and their friends turned to go” (318).

She is unable to laugh

readily, something she was constantly able to and unafraid to do in the beginning of the novel.
This suggests that although Bathsheba has grown emotionally, she still weeps for the
independence that was once part of her.
Bathsheba slowly fades into a less independent character from the vain and proud woman
she begins the novel as. However, the two transformations she undergoes provide her with an
emotional state that she was lacking throughout the beginning of the novel. She is able to grieve
and realize her mistakes. This is something that Eustacia and Sue are never able to obtain and
one can argue that this is why Bathsheba does not reach a physical or mental demise. Through
her newly attainted emotional being Bathsheba is able to realize her dependence on Gabriel.
Since her pride has vanished she is able to ask Gabriel to stay with her, something she would not
have been able to do previously. Therefore, although Bathsheba does not reach Tess’s level of
understanding and success as a tragic heroine, she is able to recognize her mistakes and correct
them to some extent, something neither Eustacia nor Sue do to their satisfaction.

32

CHAPTER 2
The Return of the Native (1878): Denial, Development and Demise

In The Return of the Native Thomas Hardy presents a rural heath that becomes one of the
determining forces behind the characters’ fates. Egdon Heath transforms into a living entity that
begins to signify light or darkness throughout the novel for individual characters. This natural
universe plays a significant role in determining the fate of the female protagonist, Eustacia Vye,
due to the unique connection the two share. Eustacia is a strong-willed beauty at the beginning
of the novel and a destitute wandering woman by the end.

When placed against Tess

Durbeyfield, Eustacia falls short and can be perceived as a flawed tragic heroine in comparison.
The flaw in Eustacia’s character stems from her inability to overcome both the social pressures
of Egdon Heath and her own weaknesses.

While Tess maintains a steady progression away

from society and transforms into a tragic heroine willingly able to accept her fate, Eustacia’s
character slowly dissolves from the stubbornness and pride of her personality to passivity in
accepting her fate. Eustacia is tragically flawed because she is unable to maintain her grasp on
reality and her identity in the face of broken possibilities.
Similarly to Bathsheba, Eustacia undergoes a series of stages that appear to lead her
towards a path of tragic awareness, yet she never fully reaches it. Eustacia begins with a strong
connection to Egdon Heath and the night. When Clym Yeobright returns to the heath, Eustacia

33
moves towards the daylight in which her dreams of moving to Paris are eventually shattered.
Eustacia then enters a moment of stagnancy unable to decide between Clym and Wildeve; in this
moment she is no longer connected to anything physical, such as Egdon Heath. The moment of
tragic conflict that has the strongest effect on Eustacia is when she denies Mrs. Yeobright
entrance into her home, which can be considered Eustacia’s significant moment of development.
From this transformation Eustacia gains tragic insight but it is too late for her to fully process her
development and attempt to correct the wrongs she has implemented.
In the beginning of the novel Eustacia is indistinguishable from Egdon Heath to a
newcomer and to the reader, as the narrator first introduces Eustacia without identifying her.
These two factors indicate Eustacia’s unique attachment as well as her confinement to Egdon
Heath. The reader receives the description of what a resting man, Diggory Venn, is observing on
a summit of Egdon Heath:
he became aware that its summit, hitherto the highest object in the whole prospect
round, was surmounted by something higher. It rose from the semiglobular
mound like a spike from a helmet. The first instinct…might have been to suppose
it the person of one of the Celts who built the barrow, so far had all of modern
date withdrawn from the scene. It seemed a sort of last man among them, musing
for a moment before dropping into eternal night with the rest of his race….There
the form stood, motionless as the hill beneath…Above the figure was nothing that
could be mapped elsewhere than on a celestial globe. (17)
The figure standing motionless on this landscape is higher than everything in the surrounding
area, indicating the figure’s superiority to the other elements. The form is perceived to be the
highest point on the “celestial globe” pointing to the notion that nothing is higher than Egdon

34
Heath and this figure, indicating a divine or priestly figure. The figure is compared to a spike on
a helmet implying that it is a form of dangerous protection to the summit. Both the reader and
the resting man are unaware that this figure is a woman, and the narrator’s description leads the
reader to believe that the figure may be a man. The reader, then, first meets Eustacia as a
mannish figure placed as the highest point of Egdon Heath and appears as a strong and
independent character able to triumph over the heath. Yet Eustacia also completes the heath,
which negates this and suggests an inability to triumph over it since she is one with it. The
figure is so far integrated with the heath that it makes up some of the heath’s beauty “Such a
perfect, delicate, and necessary finish did the figure give to the dark pile of hills that it seemed to
be the only obvious justification of their outline. Without it, there was the dome without the
lantern; with it the architectural demands of the mass were satisfied” (17). The figure does not
just add to the beauty of the Egdon Heath but completes it. The use of the adjective “delicate” is
the first indication that this person may be female and not the male character the reader was led
to believe.
The figure does not move and the narrator suggests, “The form was so much like an
organic part of the entire motionless structure that to see it move would have impressed the mind
as a strange phenomenon. Immobility being the chief characteristic of that whole which the
person formed portion of, the discontinuance of immobility in any quarter suggested confusion”
(17). Although it has been established that this figure jutting out from the summit is a person
capable of movement beyond the object that it is standing on, the narrator is stating that if the
person were to move it would look abnormal and create confusion for those observing the
summit. This suggests that the person has become a part of the landscape to the degree that they
are unable to move without disturbing the harmony of it. Therefore, the figure can never truly be

35
one with the heath because of the human capacity of movement beyond that of the natural
elements surrounding it. Since the figure does remain motionless for the majority of this scene,
it appears to be determined and unwavering in its purpose for standing there. Eustacia is clearly
patiently waiting for something at the top of the heath. When the figure does eventually move
from the summit the narrator allows the reader to know that this figure is a woman by the way
she moves: “the movement had been sufficient to show more clearly the characteristics of the
figure: it was a woman’s” (17). The fact that the reader learns more about Eustacia through her
movements is in contrast to the motionless figure that was introduced in the beginning,
illustrating that Eustacia is part of humanity instead of a fixed element of Egdon Heath.

Her

connection to Egdon Heath is made clear with this first glimpse of the female protagonist in
which the narrator unavoidably links Eustacia to the natural element.
When Eustacia returns to the top of the summit the narrator offers a darker description of
the elements surrounding her, beginning to display Eustacia’s feelings towards Egdon Heath,
a closely wrapped female figure approached the barrow from that quarter of the
heath in which the little fire lay….She ascended to her old position at the top,
where the red coals of the perishing fire greeted her like living eyes in the corpse
of day. There she stood still around her stretching the vast night atmosphere,
whose incomplete darkness in comparison with the total darkness of the heath
below it might have represented a venial beside a mortal sin. (54)
Continuing to leave us in doubt regarding the identity of this woman, the narrator projects the
theme of night and darkness that permeates the novel. The light that is emitting from the dying
fire creates an incomplete darkness where Eustacia is standing and is reminiscent of the day,
which seems empty compared to the night. Below, where the dying light does not touch, is

36
complete darkness. When set against each other, the incomplete and complete darkness, the
narrator perceives a comparison between amongst the two shades of darkness as venial and
mortal sin. Venial sin is forgiving while mortal sin is unforgiving, implying that although the lit
area seems uninviting in the description it might be less sinful than the night. Yet Eustacia is
constantly attracted to the night rather than the day, signifying her reliance on darkness. This is
perhaps one way in which Egdon Heath maintains a hold on Eustacia, by keeping her in the
mortal darkness in which the most important aspects of her destiny unfold.
It is through Eustacia’s movements that the reader receives a slight description of her as
Diggory Venn moves closer towards her. The narrator states:
That she was tall and straight in build, that she was lady-like in her movements,
was all that could be learnt of her just now, her form being wrapped in a shawl
folded in the old cornerwise fashion, and her head in a large kerchief, a protection
not superfluous at this hour and place….Her reason for standing so dead still as
the pivot of this circle of heath-country was just as obscure. Her extraordinary
fixity, her conspicuous loneliness, her heedlessness of night, betokened among
other things an utter absence of fear. (54)
This is the closest the reader and the reddleman have gotten to Eustacia, yet the narrator still
teases us with what she actually looks like. The narrator has magnified the scene from earlier
allowing a clear outline of the figure once perceived as part of the summit. The narrator once
again mentions Eustacia’s motionless stance and points out a corresponding fearlessness in her
character.

The fearlessness is an important aspect to Eustacia’s character as will be seen

throughout this chapter.

For now, one should observe the difference between Eustacia’s

fearlessness and Tess’. As one can see here, Eustacia begins with a fearless attitude that seems

37
unable of ever faltering, while Tess develops fearlessness gradually by the end of her respective
novel.
The narrator demonstrates the power that Egdon Heath holds through describing the wind
as Eustacia stands motionless once again,
The wind, indeed, seemed made for the scene, as the scene seemed made for the
hour. Part of its tone was quite special; what was heard there could be heard
nowhere else….In it lay what may be called the linguistic peculiarity of the heath;
and being audible nowhere on earth off a heath, it afforded a shadow of reason for
the woman's tenseness, which continued as unbroken as ever. (55)
This passage makes the scene completely unique because the wind seems composed for the
moment simply to illustrate the power of the heath. The wind is the only sound that can be heard
on the heath and creates a symphony of different tones. The description of the numerous sounds
that this wind makes on Egdon Heath demonstrates both its beauty and its power. The wind is
the only thing that the narrator is able to focus on in this moment, wanting to show the sheer
force of the wind throughout the heath. It is described as the language of Egdon Heath, imbuing
the heath with human characteristics. The wind also explains why Eustacia remains in a tense
and stationary position, demonstrating the physical power it holds over her.

After this

description Eustacia relays her first vocal noise to the reader and it parallels with the wind: she
utters “a lengthened sighing” (56). The sigh is compatible with the wind that is blowing around
her and suggests a deeper connection between Eustacia and Egdon Heath. It is almost as if the
two become one through the similar sounds they are making.
Another aspect of Eustacia’s character is seen through the eyes of the local people of
Egdon Heath. They do not observe her as part of the beauty of Egdon Heath, but rather as a

38
witch that interrupts the harmony of the heath. One local man states “‘the lonesome dark eyed
creature up there, that some say is a witch—ever I should call a fine young woman such a
name—is always up to some odd conceit or other; and so perhaps ‘tis she’” (52), illustrating that
since Eustacia removes herself from the locale she is seen as eccentric, which in the eyes of these
people implies an enchantress. This is also due to Eustacia’s beauty, which becomes a problem
for people such as Susan Nunsuch. Susan’s son, Charley, develops a childhood crush on
Eustacia and then falls ill. Susan is under the impression that Eustacia is a witch and has put a
spell on her son, eventually deciding to make a voodoo doll to condemn Eustacia. From this
viewpoint Eustacia becomes something evil that has been placed on the heath to harm those
living around her; she is separated from the heath in the eyes of society.
Eustacia’s detachment from the local community of Egdon Heath demonstrates both her
independence and her desire to return to an urban setting. Her reclusiveness and confidence stem
from her close-mindedness about the working class and need to escape Egdon Heath. Eustacia
feels like she does not belong in Egdon Heath’s community of farmers because of her social
position when she was living in the city. She feels out of place and yearns to return to the leisure
of the middle class in a more productive city environment. On the heath Eustacia finds herself
too proud to associate with the people around her, perhaps believing she would be lowering her
social status if she were to form relations with the community. We are told that “She hated the
change; she felt like one banished; but here she was forced to abide” (68), not only does Eustacia
feel removed from her natural environment, but she also feels as if she has been banished to
Egdon Heath and is being forced to remain within its confines.

Therefore, this creates

resentment in Eustacia towards the heath and its community. The narrator also provides a
depiction of what is being processed in Eustacia’s head while thinking about her life and Egdon

39
Heath,
Thus it happened that in Eustacia’s brain were juxtaposed the strangest assortment
of ideas, from old time and from new. There was no middle-distance in her
perspective…Every bizarre effect that could result from the random intertwining
of watering-place glitter with the grand solemnity of a heath, were to be found in
her. Seeing nothing of human life now, she imagined all the more of what she
had seen. (68)
Eustacia is clearly struggling between her conceptions of the life she was once living and her
current one. She is unable to combine the two and live happily on Egdon Heath because of the
memories of a more interesting lifestyle. Eustacia’s distancing from the local community is
having a negative affect on her person because it makes her long even more for the urban life she
was living before moving to the heath. The absence of people in her life conjures feelings of
loneliness and boredom for Eustacia. Therefore, Eustacia is homesick for her previous life and
seems unable to be happy on the solemn heath.
Chapter Seven of the first book is entitled “Queen of the Night” and provides an in-depth
description of Eustacia. From this simple title the reader is able to perceive two things about
Eustacia: she is portrayed as an ethereal being of high power and as seen earlier, most
comfortable in the night. The first sentence of the chapter is “Eustacia Vye was the raw material
of a divinity” (67), highlighting the concept that she is an exception in humanity, which places
her back onto the summit and raises Eustacia above all those around her. The narrator focuses
closely on her eyes and mouth, two forms of communication that distinguish Eustacia from other
people. Her “Pagan eyes” and mouth indicate that Eustacia is not only a divine beauty but also
seductively human as well. The description of her mouth clearly demonstrates this notion, “The

40
mouth seemed formed less to speak than to quiver, less to quiver than to kiss. Some might have
added, less to kiss than to curl” (66).

The narrator views her lips less as a tool for

communication than as a form of seduction, while those around her identify them as a form of
her pretentiousness.
Although Eustacia seems unable to have any weaknesses because of her ethereal and
independent being, the narrator mentions a force that hinders her: Egdon Heath. The beginning
of the chapter illustrated the connection Eustacia has with Egdon Heath and now the reader can
perceive the sheer power it has over Eustacia. The narrator states
But celestial imperiousness, love, wrath, and fervour, had proved to be somewhat
thrown away on netherward Egdon.

Her power was limited, and the

consciousness of this limitation had biased her development. Egdon was her
Hades, and since coming there she had imbibed much of what was dark in its
tone, though inwardly and eternally unreconciled thereto.

Her appearance

accorded well with this smouldering rebelliousness, and the shady splendour of
her beauty was the real surface of the sad and stifled warmth within her. (67)
Eustacia is placed within limitations while on Egdon Heath, demonstrating the heath’s power
over her. She is fully aware of the power that the heath holds and this hinders her development
as a human being, believing that there is nothing for her to do about it. Egdon Heath is
compared directly with Hades and Eustacia searches for the negative aspects that make it hell for
her. The concept of Egdon Heath becoming Eustacia’s own hell on earth refers back to her title
as “Queen of the Night” and illustrates that perhaps this is one of the reasons Eustacia prefers the
night rather than the day while living on the heath. At night she feels more in control of her own
power because she cannot see the physical heath and therefore puts its power out of her mind.

41
During the day the light provides Eustacia with a sense of awareness of her surroundings and a
reminder of her present living situation.
Eustacia’s greatest desire is “to be loved to madness…love was to her the one cordial
which could drive away the eating loneliness of her days” (69). This is an important point to
review while discussing Eustacia. Although she is a recluse by choice on Egdon Heath, she
wants to be loved by someone intensely yet she also wants this love in order to escape the
loneliness she feels. Therefore, Eustacia is looking for love as an escape from herself and feels
the desire to be loved for something to have in her life. This breaks her away from the ethereal
qualities she holds and portrays the human desires she contains. Through her want of love
Eustacia is demonstrating her need for companionship, which detracts from her independent
quality.
As mentioned earlier, Eustacia distances herself from the local community of Egdon
Heath to the extent that she barely associates with them. Eustacia’s reclusiveness backfires when
Clym Yeobright returns to Egdon Heath because she finds herself unable to meet him due to her
lack of relationships in the community: “She was a stranger to all such local gatherings, and had
always held them as scarcely appertaining to her sphere” (122). This reiterates Eustacia’s
feelings of keeping herself distant from the people of Egdon Heath because she considers them
below her, but now that someone has entered the heath that appears to be on Eustacia’s social
hierarchy she cannot meet him. Eustacia views Clym as a means of escape from Egdon Heath
and return to a city with wealth, yet her pride keeps her from visiting the Yeobrights’ house to
meet him. He begins to invade her mind before she has met him: “what an opportunity would
have been afforded her of seeing the man whose influence was penetrating her like summer sun.
To increase that influence was coveted excitement; to cast it off might be to regain serenity; to

42
leave it as it stood was tantalizing” (122). Eustacia understands that Clym Yeobright is an
educated man that has experienced the world outside of Egdon Heath and therefore she believes
that he could be the one to save her from it. The narrator illustrates the conflict that Eustacia is
going through as she contemplates meeting Clym, highlighting the fact that she is aware of the
possibility of letting him go and gaining peace of mind. Yet, Eustacia is overcome by the
excitement of meeting Clym to the extent that she is willing to change her identity simply to see
him. This suggests that her current identity is malleable and able to change at her will when she
perceives an opportunity in her favor.
Eustacia changes her identity by dressing up as a man and becoming a mummer to
perform for the Yeobrights and the village. Dressing as a man is reminiscent of the beginning of
the novel when Eustacia is standing on the top of the summit and the reader is unsure whether
the figure is a man or a woman. Her gender change reflects her confidence in what she is doing
and her determination to meet Clym. She is willing to take on a different role in order to meet
the man that has been influencing her mind, displaying a strong character unafraid of being
judged by those around her. After Eustacia decides to enact as a mummer, the narrator states
“Eustacia felt more and more interest in life. Here was something to do: here was some one to
see, and a charmingly adventurous way to see him. ‘Ah,’ she said to herself. ‘Want of an object
to live for—that’s all is the matter with me!’” (124). Not only is Eustacia excited that she will be
observing Clym for the first time, but that she has something to do with herself. This reflects the
idleness that Eustacia faces since she does not have to work on the heath and is no longer in the
fast paced life of the city. Unlike Thomasin who always has something to do, Eustacia is faced
with boredom and this mummers role will give her an escape from her daily routine as well as
the possibility of becoming someone else. She is also able to interact with the villagers without

43
them knowing that she is a part of them, maintaining the pride she holds against them.
Therefore, when Eustacia first observes Clym she is disguised as a young man. Eustacia
is fully aware that she is female and he is male, while Clym is left unaware that a woman is
observing him as he watches the mummers. This sets up an interesting dynamic as Eustacia
watches Clym from the stage. She is able to freely and confidently observe Clym without being
judged by those around her, while he is unable to do the same. The reader joins the narrator in
Eustacia’s mind as her thoughts of Clym are related while she lies “dead” on the stage. There is
a fleeting thought of Wildeve as she ponders Clym, “She had come out to see a man who might
possibly have the power to deliver her soul from a most deadly oppression. What was Wildeve?
Interesting, but inadequate. Perhaps she would see a sufficient hero to-night” (128). Eustacia
sees herself facing a life-threatening oppression and searches for the person to save her from it.
Unfortunately, once Clym arrives Wildeve becomes insufficient to fulfill this position. Eustacia
is placing Wildeve below her now that an educated man has arrived, showing her desperation to
escape the heath. Eustacia believes that an educated man would want to go back to an urban
setting and not remain in the wilderness. As she eventually observes Clym, Eustacia comes to a
conclusion about her feelings towards him: “She had undoubtedly begun to love him. She loved
him partly because she had from the first instinctively determined to love him, chiefly because
she was in desperate need of loving somebody” (139). Eustacia has begun to love the man she
believes will save her from Egdon Heath and the oppression she is facing. She is determined to
love him because she views him as her equal and savior, yet the narrator points out that she also
needs to love someone. The desperate need to love someone points to vulnerability in Eustacia
that has not been shown before. Although Eustacia appears to be confident in herself and simply
looking for someone to take her away from Egdon Heath, she also needs a companion in her life

44
especially because of her self-inflicted isolation. This vulnerability illustrates that Eustacia is not
above humanity as she appears to be in the beginning of the novel.
The relationship that Eustacia and Clym begin to form after they meet is an interesting
one. The title of the book in which their relationship forms is “Fascination,” which accurately
describes Clym’s feelings towards Eustacia. Clym views Eustacia as the natural goddess of the
heath and is drawn towards her through her beauty. The word fascination also implies a sense of
no longer remaining in reality because of a complete overcoming of one’s senses. A couple of
days after having met, the couple reaches a point in their relationship where words become
inadequate vehicles for communication: “They remained long without a single utterance, for no
language could reach the level of their condition: words were as the rusty implements of a
bygone barbarous epoch, and only to be occasionally tolerated” (192), Eustacia and Clym have
passed the need for language in their relationship, seeming instead to connect on a level that is
more metaphysical than physical. This is reminiscent of Eustacia’s first communication through
sighs at the beginning of the novel. Once the couple begins spending more time together and
eventually marrying, the narrator observes that “They were like those double stars which revolve
round and round each other, and from a distance appear to be one. The absolute solitude in
which they lived intensified their reciprocal thoughts” (233). Eustacia and Clym have become
one and are able to continue the solitary life Eustacia made for herself on the heath. They remain
apart from the community, allowing their senses of one another to grow.
Although Eustacia and Clym have a moment of happiness together this soon fades upon
Eustacia coming to the realization that Clym is not going to save her from Egdon Heath. She
begins to perceive Clym’s faults after coming to this realization; shattering her image of him as
her savior. One of the main flaws she perceives is “that he did not care much about social

45
failure; and the proud fair woman bowed her head and wept in sick despair at thought of the
blasting effect upon her own life of that mood and condition in him” (245). The use of the
adjective “bitterly” clearly marks the disdain Eustacia is developing towards Clym. Although
she does not socialize on the heath, Clym’s social failure goes beyond her standards of class and
society. By beginning to perceive Clym’s flaws, Eustacia is betraying herself to the reader. The
reader is able to perceive that since Eustacia is now aware that Clym will not be taking her to
Paris, she is beginning to grow less affectionate towards him. This is reminiscent of a thought
Eustacia has slightly earlier in the novel: “What a strange sort of love, to be entirely free from
that quality of selfishness which is frequently the chief constituent of the passion, and sometimes
its only one” (148). Eustacia is baffled by the concept of love devoid of any selfishness in it,
which indicates that the love she holds for Clym is a selfish love. Her passion for Clym stems
from the belief that he will whisk her away from Egdon Heath to an urban setting where they can
live the life she wants. Therefore when this becomes a false hope, Eustacia begins to fall away
from Clym and gravitate back towards Wildeve, demonstrating that her love is not only selfish
but also superficial. This defining moment of realization is the beginning of a change in Eustacia
in which the reader begins to perceive her vulnerable side.
After realizing that Clym will not be the savior Eustacia was hoping to find, the reader
can begin to see Egdon Heath’s influence on her all the more. Eustacia becomes “of late almost
apathetic…. ‘But I’ll shake it off. Yes, I will shake it off. No one shall know my suffering. I’ll
be bitterly merry, and ironically gay, and I’ll laugh in derision” (248-249), illustrating that she is
still determined in her mindset. In order to shake off this “bitter” feeling, Eustacia joins a dance
with villagers of the heath for the first time. Ironically it is here that Eustacia forgets her troubles
and is able to release herself to both the dance and Wildeve. This is an interesting moment

46
because Eustacia has been carefully distancing herself from these people and keeping a solitary
life both without and with Clym, yet this is where she receives a short wave of happiness once
again. It is through forgetting about her troubles as well as her tyrannical self and releasing
herself to the heath that Eustacia gains clarity and happiness once again; illustrating that if
Eustacia were to surrender herself to the connection she has with the heath (as Tess eventually
achieves with nature) she would be happier.
Eustacia is reunited with Wildeve during this dance, losing a sense of time with him. The
dance brings the two together again and when Eustacia is talking to Wildeve slightly later in the
novel she states “‘I married [Clym] because I love him. But I won’t say that I didn’t love him
partly because I thought I saw promise of that life in him’” (273). Eustacia is determined to
believe that she did marry Clym on the grounds of love, but finally admits that there were other
underlying reasons motivating her.
As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, the significant moment of development
for Eustacia occurs when she denies Mrs. Yeobright access into her and Clym’s household.
Right before Mrs. Yeobright knocks on the cottage door to make amends with Eustacia, Wildeve
arrives. He tells Eustacia that he is still in love with her, has come into some money, and wants
the two of them to leave the heath together. The news rattles Eustacia since she originally denied
this man because he was part of the working class of the heath and would never be able to take
her away from it; he was seemingly too ordinary for Eustacia. Thus, we see Eustacia wavering
between lovers based on whether or not they can give her what she wants. When Mrs. Yeobright
knocks on the door Eustacia believes that her knocking will eventually awaken Clym and states
“‘Yes—he is awake he will go to the door…I have a bad name with her, and you must not be
seen. Thus I am obliged to act by stealth not because I have done ill, but because others are

47
pleased to say so’” (275). Eustacia clearly does not want to associate with Mrs. Yeobright and
therefore does not check to see if Clym is fully awake. She is aware that by associating with
Wildeve she is doing something wrong and blames it on those around her. There also seems to
be a hint of awareness that by not answering the door herself, Eustacia is denying Mrs. Yeobright
entrance into her home. The reader can perceive this once Eustacia realizes that Clym did not
answer the door and the narrator states “Thought, misgiving, regret, fear, resolution ran their
swift course of expression in Eustacia’s dark eyes. She was face to face with a monstrous
difficulty; and she resolved to get free of it by postponement” (280).

Eustacia’s ocular

expressions convey her awareness of her actions in not opening the door for Mrs. Yeobright and
what the consequences may occur because of it. She regrets her action and fears the result of
what she has done; yet she realizes that she can put it off for a while, keeping Clym in the dark
and warding off any retribution.
Unfortunately the postponement does not last very long due to Mrs. Yeobright’s death,
the final factor in Eustacia’s breakdown. When Mrs. Yeobright dies Eustacia takes on the full
responsibility of the woman’s death by stating “‘I am to blame for this. There is evil in store for
me’” (293). Eustacia is owning up to the consequences of her actions, something she previously
was not able to do. She is developing a sense of responsibility and realizing what she wants in
life. However, this is as far as Eustacia’s character will progress in her evolution as a tragic
character. From this moment on she loses the characteristics that she had from the beginning of
the novel and the newly achieved sense of responsibility. The fifth book of the novel changes
tone as Eustacia slowly begins to lose herself to the heath.
In the Fifth Book, “The Discovery,” Eustacia’s former pride and confidence dissolve, and
she becomes a tragically flawed character, no longer caring about her life or attempting to correct

48
the mistakes she made. Both her exterior and interior undergo a drastic change after Mrs.
Yeobright’s death. As Wildeve leaves the cottage one day he discerns Eustacia as a “pale
tragical face” (303) from the window. Eustacia’s face has never been portrayed as pale or tragic,
indicating the change in her appearance perceived from those around her. She is no longer
perceived as a strong and independent beauty that people believed to be a witch.
After Eustacia confesses to Clym her part in Mrs. Yeobright’s death and they discuss the
matter, the narrator states: “She assented in silence, and lifted her chin. For once at least in her
life she was totally oblivious of the charm of her attitude. But he was not, and he turned his eyes
aside, that he might not be tempted to softness” (319). This is the first time that Eustacia is
unaware of the power her charm holds, which implies that she was consciously aware of it
throughout the previous scenes of the novel and used it for her advantage. Although she still
holds some sort of power over Clym, who is also very aware of her charm, her unawareness of it
in this moment indicates the increasing fragility of her sense of self.
Eustacia begins to have suicidal thoughts after telling Clym the truth about not allowing
Mrs. Yeobright in. These thoughts depict Eustacia giving up on life and not wanting to try to
mend her mounting problems. As Eustacia begins contemplating ending her life, the narrator
shows a different perspective of her changed person from another character:
Charley has always regarded Eustacia as Eustacia had regarded Clym when she
first beheld him—as a romantic and sweet vision, scarcely incarnate…he had
hardly deemed her a woman, wingless and earthly, subject to household
conditions and domestic jars.

The inner details of her life he had only

conjectured. She had been a lovely wonder, predestined to an orbit in which the
whole of his own was but a point, and this sight of her leaning like a helpless

49
despairing creature against a wild wet bank filled him with amazed horror. (32021)
Charley is the son of Susan Nunsuch, the woman who strongly dislikes Eustacia throughout the
novel because of her belief that Eustacia is a witch. Charley is a young, innocent boy who is
providing the reader with a clear and uninhibited depiction of Eustacia. His perception of her is
similar to the description provided by the narrator earlier in the text: he views her less as a
human woman than an ethereal being that has been gracing the earth with her presence. He
views her as a female trapped by the duties of womanhood and unable to truly be herself.
Charley envisions her as the center of the world with everything, including himself, revolving
around her. Upon seeing her in the condition she has fallen into after Mrs. Yeobright’s death he
becomes confused, which leads to feelings of amazement. The woman who was an ethereal
divinity to this young boy has become a helpless “creature” unable to support herself because of
her despair. Charley’s perspective of Eustacia provides the reader with an understanding of how
far she has fallen by this point in the novel. The innocent boy is shocked by the once proud
woman’s current appearance, indicting a significant change wrought in Eustacia by her slow
descent. In response to displaying suicidal thoughts to Charley Eustacia states, “‘What makes
death painful except the thought of others’ grief?—and that is absent in my case, for not a sigh
would follow me!’” (324).

Eustacia is beginning to take other people’s opinions into

consideration, thinking more deeply about whether or not those around her actually care about
her disposition. Worrying about what others think about her character is something Eustacia did
not bother with in the beginning, previously having focused specifically on her self and not
bothering with much else.
Taking into consideration other people’s opinions about her personality and having

50
suicidal thoughts are not the only out-of-character qualities that Eustacia demonstrates. For
example, Eustacia takes a step back from herself and contemplates her state of mind: “But her
state was so hopeless that she could play with it. To have lost is less disturbing than to wonder if
we may possibly have won; and Eustacia could now, like other people at such a stage, taking a
standing-point outside herself, observe herself as a disinterested spectator, and think what a sport
for Heaven this woman Eustacia was” (327). In this moment Eustacia is viewing the possible
actions she could have taken to prevent what is becoming of her; the narrator comments that it is
more painful to think about how one could have succeeded and corrected one’s mistakes than to
just accept one’s losses. Eustacia mourns for the cruel fate that she is dealt and blames the
heavens for placing her in this situation. She also cries for the first time in the novel: “This
outbreak of weeping took Eustacia herself so much by surprise that she could not leave off, and
she turned aside from him in some shame” (328). Crying is a sign of weakness and is something
Eustacia never had to deal with previously. She is literally surprised by her crying and is clearly
shamed by it as well, indicating once again the control she no longer contains over herself.
When Eustacia decides to leave the heath, or rather attempts to leave, she connects with
Egdon Heath in a way she was unable to do earlier. The connection occurs at night beside the
fire, a place Eustacia has always felt most comfortable:
She had used to think of the heath alone as an uncongenial spot to be in; she felt it
now of the whole world…. As Eustacia crossed the fire-beams she appeared for
an instant as distinct as a figure in a phantasmagoria—a creature of light
surrounded by an area of darkness: the moment passed, and she was absorbed in
night again. (237)
Eustacia has felt Egdon Heath a confining and unpleasant place to be in throughout the novel, yet

51
in this moment she views the heath as the most singular place in the world. Egdon Heath has
become her world and she has finally accepted the inevitable. The “Queen of the Night” is
engulfed in light for a moment, illuminating her figure to appear as a dream-like apparition to
those who may observe her. Everything bad that happens to Eustacia occurs during the daylight:
denying Mrs. Yeobright entrance, telling Clym about her involvement with his mother’s death,
and thinking about ending her life. Most of the time she enjoys outside is during the night and
she seems most comfortable during the night as well. Yet, within the last moments of her life,
Eustacia is literally lit up from a fire and is the only light around. The light consumes her as if it
is erasing her identity and displaying her as a sacrifice to the heath.
Although Eustacia has this realization that the heath is the only place in the world, she
still feels held captive by it and is not able to truly accept her having to remain there forever.
However, the acceptance of Egdon Heath as her captor is significant because it brings her down
even further mentally and physically:
Never was harmony more perfect than that between the chaos of her mind and the
chaos of the world without…. now that she thoroughly realized the conditions she
sighed bitterly, and ceased to stand erect, gradually crouching down under the
umbrella as if she were drawn into the barrow by a hand from beneath. Could it
be that she was to remain captive still?...‘O the cruelty of putting me into this
imperfect, ill-concieved world! I was capable of much; but I have been injured
and blighted and crushed by things beyond my control! O how hard it is of
Heaven to devise such tortures for me, who have done no harm to Heaven at all!
(340-341)
The awareness of Egdon Heath’s power over her has left Eustacia in a heap upon the ground.

52
The erect figure once standing on top of the summit, unable to be moved even by the powerful
Egdon Heath wind, is no more. Eustacia is confused by her fate and does not understand what
she could have done wrong in her life to deserve this outcome. Unlike Tess, Eustacia is never
fully aware that the outcome is completely her fault; instead Eustacia simply blames it on the act
of a higher power’s vengeance. She reverts back to the first sound she makes, a sigh. This time
the sigh is infused with the bitterness Eustacia feels towards her situation. Her loss of control is
chipping away at her self and she believes there is nothing left for her to do. After this moment
the heath becomes a demonic place for Eustacia with the rain feeling like the sting of scorpions
and “malice in every bough and bush” (349). The darkness is no longer Eustacia’s safe haven
and she has slowly begun to lose her mind.
The next time the reader encounters Eustacia she is dead. There is an ambiguity in her
death: did she throw herself into the river or did the mystical powers of Susan Nunsuch’s voodoo
doll work or perhaps the heath had something triumphed over her? One can only assume which
hypothesis is correct since the reader is not present at the time of Eustacia’s death. The character
that had begun as an ethereal being is now
eclipsed all her living phases. Pallor did not include all the quality of her
complexion, which seemed more than whiteness; it was almost light. The
expression of her finely carved mouth was pleasant, as if a sense of dignity had
just compelled her to leave off speaking. Eternal rigidity had seized upon it in a
momentary transition between fervour and resignation. Her black hair was looser
now than either of them had ever seen it before, and surrounded her brow like a
forest. The stateliness of look which had been almost too marked for a dweller in
a country domicile had at last found an artistically happy background. (361)

53
Egdon Heath essentially takes Eustacia’s soul away, leaving behind the body of a stately being.
Eustacia seems to have made her peace through her death with the heath due to the dignity and
resignation etched in her features. However, even after death Eustacia looks like an outsider of
Egdon Heath. Her stateliness separates her from the rest of the people in the village and allows
those viewing her to imagine that she had a happy life.
Since Eustacia has been removed from the plot, one would think that the novel is over,
yet Hardy chooses to continue with an afterward which does not seem as successful due to
Eustacia’s absence. The Afterward focuses on an empty and desolate Clym as well as the
romance between Thomasin and Diggory Venn. Eustacia’s influence on Clym can be seen even
after her death, as he becomes a wandering soul due to her lack of presence on earth. Eustacia’s
eventual loss of self-control and fear of Egdon Heath leads to her demise. Unlike Tess, she does
not attempt to resolve her situation in order to live her life with the man she loves. Perhaps this
is due to the fact that Eustacia never truly loves Clym or Wildeve, but simply loves herself.
Eustacia is so wrapped up in her own mind that she is unaware of her ability to rectify the
wrongs that she commits.

54

CHAPTER 3
Tess of the d’Urbervilles (1891): Four Transformations Towards Becoming a
Tragic Heroine

In Tess of the d’Urbervilles, Thomas Hardy creates a deterministic universe in which
there is no perceived god. The utilization of this specific type of world allows Hardy to create a
character that attempts to break free of a strictly social identity and society’s rule in order to
strive for control of both the past and the future. In Tess’s mind society places a heavy burden
on her actions, hindering or provoking her to carry out things she would not do otherwise.
Therefore, the female protagonist undergoes several transformations both internally and
externally as the novel progresses. There are four transformations that Tess experiences, each
occurring after a literal or metaphorical death. Although Hardy divides the novel into seven
titled phases, the division of four specific transformations demonstrates the uniqueness of Tess’s
character. Each of the transformations eventually advances Tess’s mind and interiority to the
degree that she is able to find an identity and assert herself definitively before her ultimate
demise. However, one aspect of Tess remains constant as her transformations progress: her
sexuality. Tess’s power over men remains an unyielding force that cannot be overcome.

55
Time and nature also play integral parts in Tess’s character and cannot be overlooked
while discussing her four transformations. As the transformations occur, Tess’s relationship to
time remains ambiguous and her connection to nature remains a constant that continuously seeps
into her life. At moments in the text time becomes something indefinable to both the reader and
Tess, accelerating or decelerating as Tess retains a state of contemplation that creates an out-ofbody experience for her. While nature is consistently linked to Tess in an unearthly way,
indicating her inability to detach herself from it. The definition of time in this context is a
malleable and indefinite progress of Tess’s existence. Nature can be defined as the rudimentary
elements that make up the world Hardy has created and it is completely separate from society.
Although some critics may argue that Tess is a passive character who is controlled by some
unyielding fate, the transformations shed a different light on Tess as a character.

The

transformations highlight Tess’s ability to adapt when she encounters a form of death, a process
that ultimately allows her to break free of society’s hold on her, which none of the other Hardy
women being discussed are able to achieve.
The first instance in which the narrator introduces Tess, the reader encounters a character
composed of innocence and beauty,
She was a fine and handsome girl—not handsomer than some others, possibly—
but her mobile peony mouth and larger innocent eyes added eloquence to colour
and shape. She wore a red ribbon in her hair, and was the only one of the white
company who could boast of such a pronounced adornment. (20)
Tess is introduced not as the most beautiful woman amongst her kind, but as a woman who
contains her own unique features that make her more enticing to those around her. Tess’s eyes
and mouth are the focus of her unique beauty; both add an expressiveness to her features that

56
cannot be ignored, illustrating a sensuality that permeates Tess. The second sentence in this
quote sets up Tess as a part of the purity that these women contain, which is reflected in the use
of the word “white.” Tess’s purity is an important aspect of her both before and after her first
transformation, it is also the subtitle of the novel: “A Pure Woman.” However, even though she
is a part of these pure women, she is the only woman that has a red ribbon in her hair. Here, the
red symbolizes something different about Tess in comparison to the other women present in the
scene and Hardy foreshadows the metaphorical death that will lead Tess to experience her first
transformation in the novel. The narrator expands and further enlarges upon Tess’s appearance
and exterior within this first encounter of her character:
Phases of her childhood lurked in her aspect still. As she walked along to-day, for
all her bouncing handsome womanliness, you could sometimes see her twelfth
year in her cheeks, or her ninth sparkle from her eyes; and even her fifth would
flit over the curves of her mouth now and then…to almost everybody she was a
fine and picturesque country girl, and no more. (21)
Although Tess is identified as a woman, she still contains a youthfulness that has yet to pass
from her features. The youthfulness is subtle and can be seen only on certain occasions, yet the
narrator reiterates Tess’s innocence in this depiction. To every one that is acquainted with Tess,
she is seen as nothing more than a country girl, implying that no one has perceived her in a
sexual or intimate light thus far.

Portraying Tess with this womanly appearance, yet still

containing aspects of her youthfulness, illustrates a distinctive quality she possesses at this
moment in the novel. She has unknowingly been able to maintain a certain youthfulness about
herself; through this youthful quality her innocence and purity become two defining aspects of
Tess’s personality before her first transformation. Tess’s innocence and purity encompass her

57
and this is what attracts the narrator, reader, and men to her. This places the narrator in a unique
position becoming both the storyteller and admirer of Tess.
When Angel Clare looks back on the dance as he is leaving town he perceives, “This
white shape stood apart by the hedge alone. From her position he knew it to be the pretty maiden
with whom he had not danced…she was so modest, so expressive, she had looked so soft in her
thick white gown that he felt he had acted stupidly” (24). This perception of Tess, from the eyes
of another character in the novel, begins with her simple white form, illustrating Angel’s
awareness of the purity she embodies in this moment and draws him to her. She is separated by
what surrounds her and is a lone figure on the horizon, pinpointing both the reader’s attention
and Clare’s on Tess. It is through her “position,” presumably the way she is standing, that Clare
identifies her as the woman he had not danced with. Her modesty and expressiveness draw Clare
to her and cause him to recognize the consequences in not asking her to dance. This is important
to take note of because it demonstrates that Tess’s innocence and purity are compatible with an
external sexuality that draws Clare to her before she undergoes her first transformation. Tess
appeals to the opposite sex through her exterior features, as seen here and when she meets Alec
d’Urberville later in the novel.
However, within these descriptions the reader does not yet receive any knowledge of
Tess’s interiority and mindset; only her external features are revealed, illustrating something
about either Tess’s mental state or the narrator.

Hardy is attempting to show that Tess’s

interiority is not ready to be shown to the reader or is not yet fully developed. The narrator’s
view is also being established in this moment. The narrator is focusing on Tess and revealing
only her outward appearance to the reader, demonstrating that the narrator is also enamored with
Tess’s exterior. This refers back to Penny Boumelha’s critique addressed in the introduction: the

58
narrator is infatuated with Tess and therefore adapts a distinct male voice. The narrator clearly
finds Tess’s features pleasant and therefore neglects to delve into her inner psyche.
The reader first receives some sense of Tess’s subjectivity before her first transformation
when she is associated with a distortion in time. This moment occurs while Tess is driving her
horse
The mute procession past her shoulders of tress and hedges became attached to
fantastic scenes outside reality, and the occasional heave of the wind became the
sigh of some immense sad soul, conterminous with the universe in space, and
with history in time…everything grew more and more extravagant, and she no
longer knew how time passed. (41)
The word “mute” takes away the sound in this moment, focusing the reader’s attention on Tess
and her relation to the universe. Tess is taken out of reality as she knows it thus far and is
transferred to a plane in which she is unaware of time. The wind is personified and becomes part
of the “fantastic scene” encompassing Tess, reflecting Tess’s own transcendental state. The
wind becomes the sigh of “some immense sad soul,” indicating this is the world’s sad soul that
sighs through the wind, mirroring Tess’s own sadness about the possibility of leaving her family.
Tess’s relationship to nature and the universe link her to this depiction of sadness, showing that
Tess is not living a life of happiness at the present moment. This is a moment in which Tess’s
emotional state is transferred to and reflected in the world around her through the symbolization
of the wind and the regression of time, although she is unaware of the connection.
I
Tess’s first transformation in the novel occurs after Alec d’Urberville has taken
advantage of Tess’s body in a sexual manner. He rapes her in the forest while she is essentially

59
unaware of his presence, illuminating that Tess’s relationship with nature is not always a
protective one. The fact that Tess is raped in the forest during the night highlights that nature’s
role in her life will not always be represented in a positive light. Although this scene is never
explicitly portrayed to the reader, it becomes an implied action that can only have a devastating
outcome for Tess after it has been fulfilled. When the reader first encounters Tess after the rape,
there is a significant change in her character, her perspective on life, and the world presented
around her
on reaching the edge of the escarpment [she] gazed over the familiar green world
beyond, now half-veiled in mist. It was always beautiful from here, it was terribly
beautiful to Tess to-day, for since her eyes last fell upon it she had learnt that the
serpent hisses where the sweet birds sing, and her views of life had been totally
changed for her by the lesson. Verily another girl than the simple one she had
been at home was she who, bowed by thought, stood still here, and turned to look
behind her. She could not bear to look forward into the Vale. (102)
Tess is returning to the familiarity of her childhood home, which is slightly obscured in vision
due to the surrounding mist. Although the mist veils half of what she perceives, Tess knows that
the area is beautiful and yet on observing it after she has gone through her first transformation it
is now “terribly” beautiful. The use of this particular adverb demonstrates something different in
Tess’s perspective of her past world, which is revealed to the reader in the second part of the
same sentence. From her experience with Alec, Tess has begun to view the world in a different
light. She is aware that although the world holds beauty there is another side to that beauty,
something evil such as the serpent and the birds in the example given by the narrator. Although
there maybe be birds singing in the trees, Tess is now aware that there is also the serpent

60
slithering on the ground beneath the birds. Her relationship with nature has developed into a
complexity that encompasses the darker aspects of life. The quote states explicitly that this is not
the same Tess that had left; this is a new woman with a different perspective on life. She is no
longer able to observe her hometown’s beauty without an awareness that there is a darker aspect
always lurking beneath the surface. This also reflects Tess’s own being at the moment: her
beauty remains on the exterior, but her interior is no longer the untainted purity and innocence it
was at the beginning of the novel. The use of the word “forward” implies two things in this
moment: literally, that Tess is no longer able to observe the Vale due to her darkened vision;
figuratively that she cannot look forward into the future. Her life has been altered drastically,
even more so once it is revealed in the novel that she is pregnant.

Nature clearly begins to

reflect Tess’s being and emotional state after the first transformation, “Sad October and her
sadder self seemed the only two existences haunting that lane” (105), linking her directly to
nature. Tess and the season are the only two things existing in this moment, emphasizing that
nature will always be a part of Tess’s life. The use of the word “seemed” illustrates that either
Tess or the narrator is the one linking together Tess and nature, demonstrating her unconscious
connection with nature.
Tess’s new perspective on life propels her to contemplate her role in society, or rather
her existence in the world, after her transformation has occurred. On walking back from the
fields one night, the narrative reverts to free indirect discourse as Tess ponders her situation and
meaning in life: “A wet day was the expression of irremediable grief at her weakness in the mind
of some vague ethical being whom she could not class definitely as the God of her childhood,
and could not comprehend as any other” (114). Tess’s thoughts as she walks through the woods
show a depth and complexity that were absent before the transformation. Tess’s emotional state

61
is linked to the weather and she cannot determine if this is due to the God that partook in her
childhood or some other ethical being that may exist in the world. Yet, Tess is unaware of any
other ethical being except for the one that she was taught about in her childhood, indicating her
lack of knowledge in certain areas of thought or perhaps her loss of faith. Tess’s thoughts
progress further as she continues her walk back home through the woods
[T]his encompassment of her own characterization, based on shreds of conviction,
peopled by phantoms and voices antipathetic to her, was a sorry and mistaken
creation of Tess’s fantasy—a cloud of moral hobgoblins by which she was
terrified without reason. It was that they were out of harmony with the actual
world, not she. Walking among the sleeping birds in the hedges, watching the
skipping rabbits on a moonlit warren…she looked upon herself as a figure of
Guilt intruding into the haunts of Innocence. But all the while she was making a
distinction where there was no difference. Feeling herself in antagonism she was
quite in accord. She had been made to breakan accepted social law, but no law
known to the environment in which she fancied herself such an anomaly. (114)
This moment in Tess’s mindset exemplifies her evolving connection to nature and what she truly
feels about herself after the transformation. The beginning of the quote states that Tess is being
controlled by not just her interiority and motives, but by the aversive voices in her head, which
can be identified as the morality she is expected to follow in life due to the social construct
ingrained in her. Tess is unreasonably afraid of this moral conscience that is encompassing her
mind, declaring that it had to be her moral status that was not able to remain in reality. Tess
places this moral status outside of reality and if her morality is essentially created by society then
Tess is essentially placing society out of reality and herself within it. In this moment Tess is

62
identifying herself with “the actual world” in an attempt to identify herself. As she walks by the
sleeping animals, she associates them with the “haunt” of innocence and herself as the “figure”
of guilt. She believes herself to be intruding on the innocence she believes may be lurking in
nature still and is no longer able to identify herself within innocence’s confines. Tess is unable
to associate herself with the innocence that she embodied in the beginning of the novel
embracing instead a self-proclaimed identity of guilt, even though she was in fact Alec’s victim.
However, the narrator suggests that this perception is false, that there is in fact little
difference between Tess and the animals. Tess is unable to perceive that the animals she deems
her “haunts of innocence” contain the darkness that all aspects of life hold. She is unable to see
past their exterior and into the carnal nature that all animals possess, including humans.
Although Tess has broken the social law of abstaining from sexual intercourse before wedlock,
she has not broken any law pertaining to nature since it is humanity’s carnal and natural instinct
to have intercourse in order for survival. This illustrates that Alec is in fact in tune with his
natural instincts and does not fear the consequences society may place on him, which sets up the
dichotomy between the carnal Alec and the pious Angel.

The reader can perceive that Tess

believes herself to be at odds with nature as well as society, although the reader and narrator are
both aware that she is in fact metaphysically linked to nature as depicted earlier and that this
should allow her to release herself from society’s rules and norms.
After Tess gives birth the narrator emphasizes her inability to identify herself without
drawing significant connections between herself and society, emphasizing what had been
touched on previously. Conceiving of “nature” and “society” in ways that the narrator points out
to be completely false

63
…the thought of the world’s concern at her situation—was founded on an
illusion.

She was not an existence, an experience, a passion, a structure of

sensations, to anybody but herself. To all humankind besides Tess was only a
passing thought…Most of the misery had been generated by her conventional
aspect, and not by her innate sensations. (121)
Here, Tess is concerned with the world’s opinion of her having a baby out of wedlock. The
narrator states that although Tess believes society has a watchful eye on her, ultimately she is the
concern of no one but herself. Unfortunately Tess is not yet able to perceive this in her identity,
she is still very aware of what she believes society thinks of her, and the laws society place on
her. Her actions are partially controlled and driven by her belief that the people around her are
her judging her every move. This is why when Tess walks onto the field she moves with dignity
and looks at people calmly while holding her baby, “some spirit had induced her to dress herself
up neatly as she had formerly done, and come out into the fields…she had borne herself with
dignity, and had looked people calmly in the face at times, even when holding the baby in her
arms” (121). Tess wants to demonstrate to society that although she now carries the burden of an
unwanted child out of wedlock, she can still be a part of society in a respectable manner.
Therefore, society becomes a driving force of Tess’s interiority. Although Tess develops further
insight into nature and perhaps into her own identity after this first transformation, she is not able
to break free of what she perceives to be society’s hold on her or establish her own role in the
world.
II
Tess’s second transformation occurs after her baby’s death and the completion of her
short grieving process:

64
Almost at a leap Tess thus changed from simple girl to complex woman.
Symbols of reflectiveness passed into her face, and a note of tragedy at times into
her voice. Her eyes grew larger and more eloquent. She became what would
have been called a fine creature; her aspect was fair and arresting; her soul that of
a woman whom the turbulent experiences of the last year or two had quite failed
to demoralize. But for the world’s opinion those experiences would have been
simply a liberal education. (130)
To begin with, Tess is no longer considered a girl, but rather a woman after this transformation
has taken place. She is seen as a complex woman, due to the expressions that are now etched
onto her face and travel through her voice. Tess becomes more beautiful than before, a woman
to be considered by others who encounter her. Not only is her appearance more womanly, but
her soul has grown as well. The narrator separates his opinion from the world’s opinion, once
again highlighting his attachment to Tess. The use of the words “passed” and “at times” implies
that both the reflectiveness and tragedy are only fleeting on Tess’s face. Despite her emotional
suffering she has yet to lose hope in searching for happiness and a purpose in her life. The
narrator states through free indirect discourse, “She would be the dairymaid Tess, and nothing
more” (131), illustrating that, for now, Tess is going to associate herself with the professionalism
of a dairymaid and leave all other distractions behind. She is attempting to disassociate herself
from the nature she is unconsciously linked to and the opposite sex she draws in unconsciously
as well. Throughout the novel Tess is unaware of the hold she has on men and her strong
connection to nature. Tess believes it is possible that, through work, she will be able to achieve
this disassociation. The fact that this is stated through free indirect discourse demonstrates
Tess’s growing knowledge apart from the narrator’s conception of her. Tess’s thoughts are

65
displayed to the reader without heavy input from the narrator who is still present, illustrating
Tess’s own interiority as the transformations progress.
Following her second transformation that occurs due to her baby’s death, Tess is more
aware of time pertaining to her past, present, and future, “She philosophically noted dates as they
came past in the revolution of the year, the disastrous night of her undoing at Trantridge with its
dark background of The Chase; also the dates of the baby’s birth and death; also her own
birthday, and every other day individualized by incidents in which she had taken some share”
(130). Tess marks dates in which something important has happened to her, which are mainly
her interactions with death. This illustrates that Tess is aware of the darkness that invades her
life and that it should be something for her to take note of for future reference.

Tess

“philosophically” keeps track of these dates, which suggests she wants to gain insight or
knowledge about these specific date as patterns of ritual commemoration. This focus on death in
her life and a need to gather intelligence leads Tess to contemplate her own demise
She suddenly thought one afternoon…that there was yet another date, of greater
importance to her than those; that of her own death…a day which lay sly and
unseen among all the other days of the year, giving no sign or sound when she
annually passed over it; but not the less surely there…of that day, doomed to be
her terminus in time through all the ages, she did not know the place in month,
week, season, or year. (130)
Tess seems afraid that she is unable to know when her death will take place, unable to physically
mark it on her calendar. Her fear indicates that Tess is aware that she will and wants to have a
future, but she’s unsure for how long that may last. The date of her death rises in her mind as the
most important date to mark down in her life, yet she is unable to take note of it because it is an

66
unseen and unknowable event marked in the future. Her death becomes something that is hiding
from her grasp and is incapable of revealing itself to her. The realization of her eventual death
indicates that Tess is developing a sense of tragic awareness.
As Tess makes her way to the Talbothays’ dairy farm she contemplates the fact that it is
not too far from the d’Ubervilles’ estates “All the while she wondered if any strange good thing
might come of her being in her ancestral land; and some spirit within her rose automatically as
the sap in the twigs. It was unexpected youth, surging up anew after its temporary check, and
bringing with it hope, and the invincible instinct towards self-delight” (132). Although the
previous statement suggests that Tess is attempting to disassociate herself from her unconscious
link to nature, this quote illustrates that she is permanently not able to do so. Tess is connecting
herself to the earth in which her ancestors once resided. The connection she feels with this
ancestral land evokes something within her, which the narrator describes in a simile connecting
Tess to a twig. Her spirit flows up and out of her like the sap that flows out of a twig when
broken. The spirit is identified as youth, something that fell out of Tess’s grasp after her first
transformation.

From her newly awakened youth, Tess believes she can once again find

happiness within her life and hopefulness for the future. Tess realizes within this transformation
that she can maintain the possibility of being happy in her life.
When Tess arrives at the Talbothays’ dairy farm, she remains in the same state she was in
after her second transformation: a complex woman, still unable to maintain her own grasp on her
interiority, with a surge of new youth radiating within her and a purpose to live her life:
The irresistible, universal, automatic tendency to find sweet pleasure somewhere,
which pervades all life, from the meanest to the highest, had at length mastered
Tess. Being even now only a young woman of twenty, one who mentally and

67
sentimentally had not finished growing, it was impossible that any event should
have left upon her an impression that was not in time capable of transmutation.
(138)
Although Tess has undergone difficulties and become more complex in her features, her mind is
still not developed to the point that she is able to tangibly control it and be able to define her
identity. She still has to mature within her interior, even though her outward appearance has
changed and developed more fully. All the death-related events that have touched her life thus
far could be changed and transformed into something better according to the narrator, hence
there is space for Tess to undergo another transformation and continue to advance her interiority.
Due to Tess’s second transformation, she is not crippled by the events that might have changed
another individual’s life for the worse. Instead, Tess moves forward in time and her life, in hope
of more pleasure and happiness existing in the world for her even after the horrific events she has
faced thus far.
Tess’s connection to nature and time mature as well, as her second transformation
deepens and progresses. As she is walking through an uncultivated garden, Tess is described as
moving “stealthily as a cat through this profusion of growth” (160), placing her directly into the
moment as if she were an animal accustomed to walking through the garden; it is as if she is
being stripped of her humanity. The fact that the garden is uncultivated powerfully suggests that
she is interacting with nature itself and not a consciously constructed nature, connecting her
firmly to the raw nature surrounding her. As Tess walks through the garden, certain elements of
nature physically create contact with her, “gathering cuckoo-spittle on her skirts, cracking snails
that were underfoot, staining her hands with thistle-milk and slug-slime, and rubbing off upon
her naked arms sticky blights which, though snow-white on the apple-tree trunks, made madder

68
stains on her skin; thus she drew quite near to Clare, still unobserved of him” (160). The
elements of nature listed here are mainly secretions from both animals and plants, not being
particularly pleasant, emphasizing the point made after her first transformation: other aspects of
nature unknown to her previously have begun to seep into Tess’s consciousness. The elements
listed above suggest a sensuality pertaining to Tess she’s the one rubbing nature on her “naked
arms” and the stains visually stand out on her skin, identifying her in this metaphorical sexual
act. Tess is physically covering herself with the pure elements around her, which are comprised
of elements that are secreted. By rubbing the secretion into her skin Tess while Clare is
watching her, Tess is unknowingly creating an erotic scene. After Tess’s second transformation,
nature makes a physical connection to her, something that had not been accomplished
previously. Within this same moment time reveals itself as well “There was no distinction
between the near and the far, and an auditor felt close to everything within the horizon. The
soundlessness impressed her as a positive entity rather than as the mere negation of noise…Tess
was conscious of neither time nor space.” (161). Once again, within this moment sound is
removed and the world becomes void of noise. This allows time to alter for Tess, as well as her
perceptions to both diminish and heighten. She is unable to distinguish distance, but remains
close to all the objects surrounding her. Tess is unaware of time and space once again as she is
walking through the garden, but in this instance she is very aware of the harp’s sound that is
reverberating through her. Tess has become part of Clare in this moment, demonstrating that
within her second transformation Tess is beginning to unconsciously desire a person of the
opposite sex.
During this particular transformation Tess experiences an abundance of happiness, “Tess
had never in her recent life been so happy as she was now, possibly never would be so happy

69
again. She was, for one thing physically and mentally suited among these new surroundings”
(169), demonstrating that her happiness is something that she has never had the opportunity to
feel and revel in before. Tess is once again compared to a tree in this moment of happiness:
“The sapling which had rooted down to a poisonous stratum on the spot of its sowing had been
transplanted to a deeper soil” (169). Instead of being compared simply to a twig, Tess has
become a sapling that has been removed from the harmful soil she had begun her growth within.
The “poisonous stratum” that the sapling has rooted onto can be a metaphor for her time with
Alec, while the deeper soil becomes Clare. Tess has managed to transfer herself from Alec’s
abuse to Angel’s love, demonstrating her growth after the second transformation.

Tess is

opening herself up to the happiness that she has been able to find through Clare and perhaps look
forward to a future, something she could not contemplate earlier.
Approaching the precipice of the third transformation Tess comes to a realization through
of her love for Clare. Once again she is not acting completely on her own will, but rather on
behalf of Clare’s feelings towards knowing her past. She decides to reveal to him the darker
aspects of her past, a decision that she grapples with throughout their relationship. Even though
it is stated that “She dismissed the past—trod upon it and put it out, as one treads on a coal that is
smouldering and dangerous” (247), Tess feels the pressure of her past hindering her relationship
with Clare and comes to the conclusion that she has to tell him in order to reach the full potential
of happiness she can have with him. She is aware that her past may alter the way Clare perceives
her and comes to the conclusion that she should be the one to reveal her past instead of someone
else. Upon telling Clare about her past, he provokes her third transformation by stating, “‘You
were one person; now you are another…the woman I have been loving is not you…’ He looked
upon her as a species of imposter, a guilty woman in the guise of an innocent one” (290-91).

70
Clare is confusing Tess’s own concept of her self and identity through stating that she is not the
woman he fell in love with. Rather, she has been an imposter to her true identity, something that
Tess cannot seem to comprehend and that jars her sense of being “the horrible sense of his view
of her so deadened her that she staggered” (291). Tess detaches herself from her past after the
second transformation and is therefore confused about why telling Clare about the past would
make him change his mind about her. After this argument occurs, Tess removes herself to her
bedroom where “the lonely Tess forgot existence, surrounded by the aromatic stillness of the
chamber that had once, possibly, been the bride-chamber of her own ancestry” (297). In this
moment Tess does not contain a substantial existence that she can connect herself to and identify
with; she is simply connected to her ancestry and this is the only thing she is able to latch onto.
The mention of the past to Clare and his reaction to it has made Tess more aware of her entire
past life and has expanded to include her ancestral past as well due to the chamber she is residing
in. This moment is also a reflection of Tess’s curious relationship to time. The room is still and
silent, lulling Tess into a state of unawareness about her self, yet maintaining a connection to her
ancestry. The connection made to her ancestry is reminiscent of a time that has long passed, but
remains in the span of this current time due to Tess’s link with her heritage in this moment.
Tess’s connection to her ancestry stems from inhabiting the room of her forefathers and Tess
draws it forward to merge with the present time. Since her existence has been forgotten the past
and the present are able to combine in her mind. Tess’s own past, especially the rape, begins to
encompass her and becomes on of the defining features with her upcoming third transformation.
The past becomes something Tess tries to rid herself of but is just as connected to as she is to
nature.

71
III
The pivotal moment before Tess’s third transformation occurs when Clare is
sleepwalking, repeatedly shouting out, “My wife—dead, dead!” (311-12), eventually placing
Tess in a coffin, foreshadowing her eventual demise. This moment also signifies the second
metaphorical death (the first having been the rape); Clare has demolished Tess’s identity after
finding out about her past, and this translates to placing her in the coffin. Clare no longer
perceives Tess as the woman whom he fell in love with, but rather someone he no longer knows,
which essentially makes her dead to him. Although this third transformation may seem to push
Tess backwards in her progress towards forming an identity apart from society, it actually allows
her to contemplate her existence without an attachment to the past in her mind, “…disconnecting
herself by littles from her eventful past at every step, obliterating her identity, giving no thought
to accidents or contingencies which might make a quick discovery of her whereabouts by others
of importance to her own happiness, if not to theirs” (347), suggesting a progression. Tess is
slowly attempting to remove herself from her past and ridding herself of an identity that
associates her self with the past. Everything that Clare has said to Tess is processed and this is
the solution she comes to, although it is a seemingly impossible task to fulfill.
Within the third transformation, Tess’s connection to nature becomes even more
pronounced than before. In the first transformation she is connected visually to nature, in the
second transformation nature physically clings to her body, and in the third transformation Tess
physically interacts with nature’s process concerning life on her own terms. The transition
occurs when Tess encounters the pheasants strewn about the field, “writhing in agony, except the
fortunate ones whose tortures had ended during the night by the inability of nature to bare more”
(350). In Tess’s mind nature ended the lives of some of the birds because it could not “bare

72
more” of the suffering. Therefore, Tess believes herself linked with nature while looking at the
pheasants because she is also unable endure their pain, “With the impulse of a soul who could
feel for kindred sufferers as much as for herself, Tess’s first thought was to put the still living
birds out of their torture, and to this end with her own hands she broke the necks of as many as
she could find, leaving them to lie where she had found them” (350). To begin with, Tess is
immediately associated with the birds as part of a similar suffering, implying that she is
physically suffering inside on the same level as these dying birds. Her immediate thought is to
kill each of the birds that nature had overlooked the night before to allow the birds an escape
from their suffering. Through the action of killing each of the dying birds with her own two
hands, Tess has physically taken over nature’s role and attempts to do more than it has been able
to do for the birds. She places them back where she finds them, creating the illusion that the
birds died because of nature’s release and not by a human’s own hands. This also implies that
since Tess is linked to the birds the only way to relieve her own suffering is through death. After
she has killed the birds “she was ashamed of herself for her gloom of the night, based on nothing
more tangible than a sense of condemnation under an arbitrary law of society which had no
foundation in Nature” (351), indicating that Tess has learned something through this experience.
She finally sees that her suffering has been the result of society’s expectations, which Tess had
been unable to internalize previously. Tess’s physical interaction with nature seems to open her
eyes to the role nature and suffering plays both in her life and the world around her. Through the
act of killing the birds Tess is beginning to realize that Nature is not a separate entity such as
God or society and that she is a part of this Nature.
Tess’s interaction with nature while killing the suffering birds provokes her to assess her
identity to some extent. One way that she does interact with her identity within this

73
transformation is through shaving her eyebrows off, “she mercilessly nipped her eyebrows off.
Thus Tess walks on; a figure which is part of the landscape; a fieldwoman pure and simple”
(353). This action transforms Tess into an individual that is less human than those around her.
Eyebrows are a unique feature of the human body that allow human beings an individualized
form of expression. Therefore, Tess has removed a form of her physical identity from her body
that identifies her expressional state and detracts from her beauty. From this Tess becomes no
more than a simple figure on the landscape, “virtually non-existent” (370). Yet the narrator
states, “Inside this exterior, over which the eye might have roved as over a thing scarcely
percipient, almost inorganic, there was the record of a pulsing life which had learnt too well, for
its years, of the dust and ashes of things, of the cruelty of lust and the fragility of love” (353).
Although Tess’s outward appearance seems to have lost an identity and appear almost inhuman,
her interior is alive and knowledgeable of the humanity and life that surrounds her. Although
Tess is attempting to rid herself of her past, it has already influenced and penetrated her to a
degree that cannot be ignored.
The dead pheasants are not Tess’s only interaction and connection with birds in nature.
There is an unearthly scene in which Tess observes arctic birds flying in the sky,
[they] began to arrive silently…gaunt spectral creatures with tragically eyes—
eyes which had witnessed scenes of cataclysmal horror inaccessible polar regions
of magnitude such as no human being had ever conceived…These nameless birds
came near to Tess and Marian, but of all they had seen which humanity would
never see, they brought no account. (362)
The birds are completely quiet, creating a noiseless space as Tess observes them. They are
defined as otherworldly creatures without names known to the human tongue that have witnessed

74
presumably terrible things that humanity has never and will never lay eyes on. These birds seem
to almost make contact with Tess and yet they do not, perhaps implying that she will not be able
to understand what they have witnessed. One has to wonder why these birds cross paths with
Tess during this transformation. A symbolization the arctic birds may stand for is an organic
form of nature that Tess is not connected to. The arctic birds have never been seen by humanity
and the area of the world they come from is the true natural form of the world, untouched by
humans. Although Tess is linked to the nature that surrounds her, these birds represent a part of
nature that hinges on indifference and atrocity; the immanent will of Nature. Tess is not fully
aware of the significance these birds hold, but the fact that she is observing them suggests that
she is beginning to perceive the tragic nature of existence.
It is through her attempt to rid herself of the past that Tess is able to come to an epiphany
about herself which is revealed in a letter to Clare, “I am the same woman, Clare, as you fell in
love with; yes, the very same!—not the one you disliked but never saw. What was the past to
me as soon as I met you? It was a dead thing altogether. I became another woman, filled full of
new life from you. How could I be the early one?...I am sick as heart, not only for the old times,
but for the present” (421). In this moment, Tess is asserting herself to Clare, she is confident in
the woman she became with him and still is now. She is not looking into the future, but simply
at the present her mind remains focused as she asserts that the past no longer affects her present
self. However, she is unable to see how the past has shaped who she is now and therefore, she
still remains attached to it. Although the past maintains a hold on shaping who Tess is, the past
does not define her. From her past experiences, Tess continues to progress her interiority, but
they do not determine her ultimate happiness.

75
There is a moment in which Tess is connected to nature while she is not present in the
scene. While Clare is walking to see Tess for the first time after his return home, we see him
“driving up the hill...which, three or four months earlier in the year, Tess has descended with
such hopes and ascended with such shattered purposes…The pale and blasted nettle-stems of the
preceding year even now lingered nakedly in the banks, young green nettles of the present spring
growing from their roots” (465). The first part of this quote indicates an interesting correlation
most people ascend with hopes and descend when they are not realized, yet Tess has done the
reverse in this instance. One could interpret this in correlation to Tess’s transformations: she
began with hopes of a future but was denied this after her first transformation—the rape—yet
this opened up a contemplation for different purposes for her life although these shatter upon
each transformation, they rebuild in the next. The nature metaphor implies that there is room for
new growth upon the old and dying. This can be linked directly to Tess, illustrating that Clare
now believes there is still hope for their love and that there is some youthfulness remaining in
Tess.
IV
Although the reader does not receive a direct account of what Tess is thinking before
killing Alec, she states later to Clare, “I have done it—I don’t know how…Still, I owed it to you,
and to myself’ (481). This is Tess’s fourth and final transformation, Tess has reached a point in
her mind in which she knows what she wants and is willing to do anything for it, including
consciously breaking the social and natural prohibitions she could not break free of earlier. She
wants is to be with Clare and attempts to attain the happiness discussed earlier. In order to do
this, Tess has to destroy her past blight that Clare looks down upon, which is Alec. The act of

76
killing Alec represents Tess’s attempt to correct her past for Clare and herself, asserting her
freedom from conventional morality.
She has become an assertive woman, one that is able to simply say “I am ready” (495) to
the men who take her to her death and tell Clare “This happiness could not have lasted. It was
too much. I have has enough” (495), demonstrating she is no longer disillusioned. It is within
this fourth transformation that Tess reaches a stage of innocence that she had lost since the
beginning of the novel “wrapped in profound slumber, Tess’s lips being parted like a halfopened flower near [Clare’s] cheek. The caretaker was so struck with their innocent appearance”
(489). Similar to the beginning of the novel, there is a focus on Tess’s lips in the scene,
comparing them to a flower. From there the reader is taken into the eyes of the caretaker and is
made to see the innocence that has returned to Tess. Through being reunited with Clare after
literally killing the darkness from her past and released herself from society’s hold, Tess has
become whole and transcended to a state of innocence once again.
Thomas Hardy divides Tess of the d’Urbervilles into seven titled phases; the fact that
Hardy titles the sections phases and not parts or books indicates a fluid progression towards a
particular objection, in this case the end result of Tess’s four transformations. The final and
seventh phase is entitled “Fulfillment” illustrating that Tess has reached some sort of
actualization or completion in her life. Tess is able to fulfill the completion of her fourth
transformation by disposing herself from society and regaining what she had lost, Clare, there is
nothing left for her now. Tess’s death is reminiscent of the suffering pheasants that she broke the
necks of, implying that Tess is also freeing herself from her own suffering. Each transformation
brings Tess closer to freedom from society and the suffering that has been placed on her, while
her connection to both her past, the past of her ancestry, her present, and the natural world each

77
strengthens. Tess’s response to her death and her ability to break free of society are what
separate her from Hardy’s other female characters.

She is able to steadily overcome the

challenges presented to her in ways that her counterparts are not able to achieve in their
respected novels, becoming the only fully realized tragic heroine.

78

CHAPTER 4
Jude the Obscure (1895): An Attempt to Demolish the Institution of Marriage

In Jude the Obscure Thomas Hardy presents a world and society that is slowly being
transformed by the uprising of modernity. Modernity creeps into the lives of each of the
characters just as the natural world and traditions appear to mold the lives of Bathsheba,
Eustacia, and Tess. The institution of marriage and its effect on people, especially women, is
highlighted in this novel by the female protagonist. The female protagonist in Jude the Obscure,
Sue Bridehead, is presented as an intelligent and opinionated woman who is unafraid to speak
her mind when given the opportunity. She remains consistent in her character throughout the
novel until marriage seeps into her life for the first time and she is placed as the antithesis of
Arabella, Jude’s first wife. After Sue faces her first marriage, the narrator slowly begins to
reveal the flaws Sue’s character has. However, Sue returns to her previous character once the
marriage is dissolved, although she is weaker in character with the reader’s knowledge of several
of her flaws and she begins to feel the pressure of society against her. This leads Sue to begin to
reveal her thoughts on marriage. Once the character Father Time is introduced to the plot and
modernity is thrust into Sue’s life even further, her character undergoes a drastic regression or

79
rather degeneration from her former character. She reverts from her former self, falling into the
rules society and the institution of marriage has placed on her.
The first time the reader and Jude are introduced to Sue Bridehead is while she is not
actually present in the scene. Before Sue is physically introduced into the text, Jude begins
looking through his aunt’s drawer and observes a
photograph of a pretty girlish face in a broad hat with radiating folds under the
brim like the rays of a halo. He had asked who she was. His grand-aunt had
gruffly replied that she was his cousin Sue Bridehead, of the inimical branch of
the family; and on further questioning the old woman had replied that the girl
lived in Christminster, though she did not know where, or what she was
doing….His aunt would not give him the photograph. But it haunted him; and
ultimately formed a quickening ingredient in his latent intent of following his
friend the schoolmaster thither. (72)
The introduction of Sue provided here reveals several aspects of her character to the reader.
Although the photograph is not described in detail, one can assume that Sue contains beauty and
a unique attractiveness in her features that cannot be overlooked due to the fact that her
photograph haunts Jude. The word “haunt” implies obsession and Jude is drawn to her simply
from looking at her picture, illustrating that Sue has unwillingly already ensnared Jude. This is
reminiscent of Tess’s unique beauty that draws in both Alec and Clare. Sue also lives in
Christminster, a place that has become Jude’s mecca, which pushes his determination to make it
there even further and demonstrates a certain power that Sue already holds over him. It is
significant that Sue is introduced to both the reader and Jude through a photograph. The
photograph introduces the concept of modernity, which becomes an important theme throughout

80
the novel in relation to all the characters, especially Sue. The photograph also allows Jude to
place his own perception of this woman’s character before meeting her and he is able to set her
up as an ideal woman without knowing her actual character. This skewed perception allows for
a distortion in reality of Sue’s character because when the narrator does eventually introduce
Sue, the reader sees her as Jude has been imagining this woman.

Therefore, her actual

personality is intensified and much stronger than the woman that had been envisioned.
However, when Sue is introduced from afar her character remains an ideal one for the
time being. Jude is overcome by this woman’s beauty to the point that he is unable to speak to
and interact with her. Therefore, the narrator remains at a distance from Sue only relating Jude’s
feelings towards her, “The consciousness of her living presence stimulated him.

But she

remained more or less an ideal character, about whose form he began to weave curious and
fantastic day-dreams” (83). Although Jude has physically seen Sue, his shyness has kept him at
this distance in which he can fantasize about her without truly knowing her and mold her into the
woman he wants her to be. Therefore, the reader still remains in the dark about Sue’s true
character, even when descriptions of Sue are related it is provided through Jude’s observations.
For example when the narrator reveals Sue’s features in more depth: “She looked right into his
face with liquid, untranslatable eyes, that combined, or seemed to him to combine, keenness with
tenderness, and mystery with both, their expression, as well as that of her lips, taking its life from
some words just spoken to a companion, and being carried on into his face quite unconsciously”
(83), although this is a closer description of Sue it is still heavily clouded by Jude’s opinion of
her. The narrator specifically states that it is only Jude who believes her eyes are filled with
tenderness and mystery.

This implies that Jude’s perception is still clouded by his own

perception of Sue, believing that she a woman of kindheartedness.

81
When the narrator does finally focus on Sue without Jude’s influence on her personality,
the reader observes only Sue, while Jude is removed from the scene. This is the first time in the
novel in which Jude is not present and the narrator focuses solely on another character, revealing
the importance of the moment. In the scene Sue happens upon a vendor selling “images,” which
turn out to be statues of Greek gods and goddesses. Due to the perception that Jude has placed
on Sue, one would assume that Sue is a woman of Christian religion and would not stop by this
vendor. Yet, Sue not only lingers at the vendor but also buys two of the statues: purchasing the
goddess Venus, who is associated with love, and the god Apollo, who is the symbol for light and
truth. Buying these statues presents a woman who is not rooted in Christianity and is willing to
experience new worldly concepts. It also demonstrates that she is knowledgeable and somewhat
unafraid of what society may think of her. Although she buys these statues she does keep them
hidden from the landlady, aware that she can get into trouble for having them in her possession.
Sue seems to be in want of her own private rebellion and this is something only the narrator and
the reader are aware of.
When Jude eventually meets Sue he is surprised at the woman she actually is in
comparison to the Sue in his mind. Sue is completely different from the fantasy Jude creates in
his head, the narrator states “Jude was surprised to find what a revelation of woman his cousin
was to him. She was so vibrant that everything she did seemed to have its source in feeling. An
exciting thought would make her walk ahead so fast that he could hardly keep up with her; and
her sensitiveness on some points was such that it might have been misread as vanity” (96),
illustrating several things about Sue’s character. The first aspect of her character presented here
reveals that Sue expresses herself in a very vibrant way that leads one to assume she has a wealth
of feelings attached to everything that she does, this is in contrast to Jude who portrays his

82
feelings in a subtle manner. Sue also values her own opinions and ideas to the point that she
reveals a weakness if someone attempts to argue against her, unable to hide her vulnerability.
The narrator states that this aspect of Sue might be considered vanity to some people, thinking so
highly of her own opinions, yet not to Jude.
Throughout the novel Sue has unique opinions on what gender means to her, which are
extremely important to understanding the character of Sue. These views separate her from the
previous Hardy women and present the reader with a new generation of female character. The
first time Sue’s views on gender are hinted at is when Jude’s aunt is relating Sue’s childhood to
him, “‘She was not exactly a tomboy, you know; but she could do things that only boys do as a
rule’” (105). As a child Sue was able to surpass gender roles and do activities that young girls
normally would not or could not do in the eyes of society. The aunt makes a point of saying that
she was not a tomboy, indicating that Sue still retained some semblance of her female qualities
while overstepping the gender boundaries. When Sue escapes from her boarding school and
goes to see Jude several important events happen that project more of Sue’s unique views on
gender portrayed directly from her. The first instance that points to gender is when Sue changes
out of her wet clothes and puts on Jude’s clothes. When the landlady comes up she mistakes Sue
for a young man, completely changing Sue’s gender from female to male. This confusion of
identity is reminiscent of Eustacia dressing as a mummer in The Return of the Native, but is
heightened and differentiated by what Sue says to Jude while dressed in man’s clothes. Sue
states
‘You called me a creature of civilization, or something, didn’t you?.…It was very
odd you should have done that…it is provokingly wrong. I am sort of a negation
of it…. My life has been entirely shaped by what people call a peculiarity in me.

83
I have no fear of men, as such, nor of their books.

I have mixed with

them…almost as one of their own sex. I mean I have not felt about them as most
women are taught to feel—to be on guard against attacks of their virtue; for no
average man—no man short of sensual savage—will molest a woman by day or
night.’ (141)
Although Jude has spent some time with Sue, he still does not perceive her as she actually is nor
does the reader and this statement comes as a surprise. Sue views herself as a contradiction of
civilization and not a part of it, which implies that Sue is against what civilization stands for and
the limitations it places on her as a woman. Sue does not want to be considered a person living
in society, but rather a person living outside of it. She continues to say that she has a peculiarity
in her personality, indicating that this is one of the reasons she considers herself a negation of
what society stands for. The main trait that separates her from society’s ideals is Sue’s ability to
equate herself with men. Sue is unafraid of both their physical attributions and their knowledge;
she is able to read the same books as men and talk to men on an equal level. She removes herself
from other women’s teachings on the savagery of men and focuses on her intellectual equality
with them instead. Sue is able to disregard gender to the degree that she feels comfortable and
equal amongst those of the opposite sex, even though society suggests it is impossible. Sue goes
so far as to give an example of her intermingling with men closely, simply for the intellectual
companionship they have to offer,
‘We used to go about together…like two men almost…He wanted me to be his
mistress, in fact, but I wasn’t in love with him—and on my saying I should go
away if he didn’t agree to my plan, he did so…. People say I must be coldnatured,—sexless—on account of it. But I won’t have it! Some of the most

84
passionately erotic poets have been the most self-contained in their daily lives.’
(142-143)
Sue almost considers herself a man while walking in the presence of her previous male friend.
She seems to want a companion who is able to think at her intellectual level and is therefore
drawn to men. Her beauty allows her to be close with a man, until that man believes he is in love
with her. Sue denies this man’s love on the grounds that she does not love him, which prompts
the question of whether or not Sue can actually love. She answers this question in the second
half of the quote, mentioning what society thinks of her. She believes that the life she is
currently living is not as sexless and passionless as society may assume. Sue considers herself
self-contained in her passions and able to love just simply choosing not to. However, the reader
can perceive after Sue has married Phillotson that perhaps she is unable and scared to indulge in
erotic passions due to the fact she is terrified to consummate the marriage. On some level, Sue
seems to be telling Jude about her male acquaintance both to warn him and to make him jealous.
She is showing him that she has interacted with males in her past and has not been afraid to deny
them when they express their love, something Jude should realize and take from the story.
It is significant to look at Jude’s realization that his views on gender differ significantly
from Sue’s because it demonstrates her opinions and mindset in more depth. As Sue is talking
Jude believes “she seemed to get further and further away from him with her strange ways and
curious unconsciousness of gender” (143), illustrating both his confusion of the woman that has
consumed his life and the realization that Sue is different from the woman he thought she might
be. Sue’s opinions are highlighted here as being different from other women Jude may have
encountered in his life and illustrates her advanced views on the role a woman plays in society.
After thinking about what Sue has said, the narrator states

85
If [Jude] could only get over the sense of her sex, as she seemed to be able to do
so easily of his, what a comrade she would make; for their difference of opinion
on conjectured subjects only drew them closer together on matters of daily human
experiences. She was nearer to him than any other woman he had ever met, and
he could scarcely believe that time, creed, or absence, would ever divide him from
her. (147)
Jude is unable to overcome the concept of gender like Sue has been able to do in the past and is
able to do currently. Although he recognizes they would be great companions due to their
differing views and togetherness on human experiences, Jude is still extremely aware of Sue’s
womanliness and cannot remove himself from his feelings for her. Sue’s uniqueness and beauty
are what seem to draw Jude towards her. Jude realizes that Sue will always hold power over him
and he will never be able to simply be her friend, which is exactly what Sue was attempting to
warn Jude about.
In this case Sue is aware that she is drawing Jude in and is unafraid of the consequences
in doing so, already having warned him about her ability to deny men.

Although she is

dismissive and rude at times while with Jude in person, she is able to keep him around through
the forgiveness notes she sends him. Every time after the two characters meet there is usually a
note sent to Jude from Sue apologizing for the negative and disrespected way she acted while
they were together. There are about five of these notes that Sue writes to Jude begging for his
forgiveness. These note indicate that although Sue presents a strong-willed and nonchalant
attitude while expressing opinionated ideas that she is unafraid to speak aloud, she does not want
to scare away Jude completely. The notes allow her to act however she likes in person to Jude
while keeping him in love with her. In fact, Jude says to Sue “‘That you are not so nice in your

86
real presence as you are in your letters’” (158), illustrating that to some extent Jude is
consciously aware of what Sue is doing to him. The forgiveness notes begin to point out flaws in
Sue’s character. This entire situation opens Sue’s character to reveal that she is vulnerable inside
and in want of companionship; otherwise she would not attempt to apologize to Jude for her
curtness and simply let him drift away. Sue’s vulnerability begins to show through her exterior,
after Jude has said this and their conversation has ended the narrator relates “Her being able to
talk learnedly showed that she was mistress of herself again; and before they parted she had
almost regained her vivacious glance, her reciprocity of tone, her gay manner, and her secondthought attitude of critical largeness towards other of her age and sex” (161). The narrator is
demonstrating that Sue has been affected by what Jude has said and it is through her speech that
she slowly begins to regain control of herself. The word “almost” suggests that the affect of
Jude’s speech has jarred her more than she would have liked. The narrator carefully lists all of
Sue’s exterior qualities that she begins to regain control of after Jude addresses her forgiveness
notes. It shows the specific aspects that Sue contains such as her particular glance and manner,
including her thoughts on gender. These are all aspects that Sue consistently attempts to keep in
check throughout the novel that the reader may not always see, but here the narrator suggests that
the awareness of these qualities are always present in Sue’s mind.
One flaw that the narrator slowly begins to reveal and is more apparent after Sue
dissolves her marriage with Phillotson is that she portrays a childish nature at times. For
example the narrator directly says that in some matters Sue is a child, “Though so sophisticated
in many things she was such a child in others” (233). Her childish nature is heightened when
Arabella, Jude’s ex-wife, comes back into his life. Sue begins to throw tantrums that negate the
character presented when she was first introduced. She becomes so overcome by Arabella’s

87
presence that she agrees to marry Jude, something she has refused to do since coming to Jude
after divorcing Phillotson. This indicates a degeneration in Sue’s character that is becoming
apparent in the novel and is heightened with the introduction of Father Time, Jude and Arabella’s
son slightly later in the novel.
Sue’s childish nature demonstrates a spoiled side of her character as well, illustrating
another flaw in her character. She wants a specific kind of relationship with Jude and is
unwilling to submit to his own wants. Her refusal to marry Jude also presents vulnerability in
Sue’s character: she is terrified of once again being ensnared in marriage in which she feels
trapped and stripped of her freedom. After leaving Phillotson to live with Jude, one of the first
things Sue relays to him is
‘But I think I would much rather go on living as lovers, as we are living now, and
only meeting by day. It is so much sweeter—for the woman at least, and when
she is sure of the man. And henceforward we needn’t be so particular as we have
been about appearance….Should be two dissatisfied ones linked together, which
would be twice as bad as before.’ (249)
Sue explicitly tells Jude that she would rather live as lovers than rooted in marriage.
Disregarding what society may think of this living condition, Sue would rather live unmarried
with Jude than risk another marriage. She concludes that they would be happier if they were not
bound together through the institution of marriage. Sue sincerely believes that the two of them
would be even more dissatisfied than their previous marriages because both of them are coming
from failed marriages. Sue continues along this vein to say
‘Apart from ourselves, and our unhappy peculiarities, it is foreign to a man's
nature to go on loving a person when he is told that he must and shall be that

88
person's lover. There would be a much likelier chance of his doing it if he were
told not to love. If the marriage ceremony consisted in an oath and signed contract
between the parties to cease loving from that day forward, in consideration of
personal possession being given, and to avoid each other's society as much as
possible in public, there would be more loving couples than there are now.’ (249)
Sue’s speech demonstrates her feelings towards the institution of marriage and how it ruins the
love between a couple. Sue believes that the flaw in marrying another person is that one is told
to sign a contract to love the other person and that makes them rebel against one another. Sue
suggests that if a couple about to get married were instead signing a contract that bound them to
cease loving one another and not act like they were in fact married, the couple would not be
unhappy. If the married couple were bound to act like lovers, Sue believes there would be
greater success in the marriage. Having an open disdain against marriage reflects back on Sue
being a woman placed on the outskirts of society because she is not searching for a marriage but
rather avoiding one. Sue also mentions to Jude that “‘What tortures me so much is the necessity
of being responsive to this man whenever he wishes, good as he is morally!—the dreadful
contract to feel in a particular way in a matter whose essence is its voluntariness!’” (204),
demonstrating her frustration in her marriage with Phillotson. Sue does not comprehend why she
has to do something she does not want to do in a particular moment, which reflects back onto her
spoiled tendency. She does not want to be controlled by a man and is confused as to why she has
to listen to Phillotson simply because the two are wedded. Sue proceeds to generalize about her
sex stating “‘Fewer women like marriage than you suppose, only they enter into it for the dignity
it is assumed to confer, and the social advantages it gains them sometimes—a dignity and an
advantage that I am quite willing to do without’” (250), demonstrating that she is separate from

89
other women when faced with the concept of marriage. Sue does not feel as if she needs to
advance socially or gain dignity through marriage, believing she does not need these qualities in
her life through marriage and rather contains them in her own right. She assumes that this is why
many women actually end up marrying and that it seemingly has not much to do with love the
two may share for one another.
Sue’s conceptions of the flaws within the institution of marriage are in fact demonstrated
slightly earlier than this discussion with Jude. It is in a previous conversation with Jude that Sue
discusses her decision to marry Phillotson, identifies why she did it, and what she learned from
it,
‘before I married [Phillotson] I had never thought out fully what marriage meant,
even though I knew. It was idiotic of me—there is no excuse. I was old enough,
and I thought I was very experienced. So I rushed on…with all the cock-sureness
of the fool that I was!…I am certain one ought to be allowed to undo what one
has done so ignorantly. I daresay it happens to lots of women; only they submit,
and I kick…When people of a later age look back upon the barbarous customs
and superstitions of the times that we have the unhappiness to live in, what will
they say!’ (206)
Sue admits to having no idea what marriage consisted of before marrying for the first time,
although she thought she had some idea. She hints to the concept of divorce, the ability of being
able to end a marriage if one party believes they have made a mistake in agreeing to it and were
unaware of the consequences. Sue suggests that she is not the first woman to experience this
feeling but other women just live with it whereas she is prepared to fight for her happiness,
indicating once again her distinction from other women. She calls the law-binding act of

90
marriage a savage custom that is in need of change with this age of modernity that the world is
facing, Sue seems to believe that society’s institutions should be part of the change towards
modernity. There is a sense of entrapment for Sue in marriage that she wants to overcome by
releasing herself from the marriage with Phillotson. She suggests to Jude while she is still
married to Phillotson that “‘[w]hy can’t we agree to free each other’” (214), displaying the want
for freedom that was mentioned earlier. The freedom Sue is referring to seems to be her want to
establish intellectual friendships with males that do not lead to any passions or declarations of
love from them, an asexual companionship. Therefore by dissolving the marriage she has with
Phillotson, Sue would be able to create this ideal freedom with Jude once again. She implies that
he would also gain freedom through ending his marriage with Arabella, indicating both Sue’s
projection of her own mindset onto Jude and her want to have him to herself.
Sue feels the need to further justify her marrying Phillotson with Jude besides her
previous reasoning of not knowing what marriage entailed. Sue wants to portray that she had a
say in the marriage to some extent and does not want to appear weak in simply having married
Phillotson to end a scandal,
‘But I haven't the courage of my views, as I said before. I didn't marry him
altogether because of the scandal. But sometimes a woman's love of being loved
gets the better of her conscience, and though she is agonized at the thought of
treating a man cruelly, she encourages him to love her while she doesn't love him
at all. Then, when she sees him suffering, her remorse sets in, and she does what
she can to repair the wrong.’ (233)
Sue states that she did not simply marry Phillotson because of the scandal surrounding her but
because she lost faith in her own beliefs. She believes that the power of being loved by someone

91
else overcame her and dissolved her views on marriage for the moment, pushing Phillotson to
love her further although she did not truly love him. Sue applies this phenomenon to all women,
weakening her sex as well as her own beliefs in the eyes of both Jude and the reader. Sue
mentions an awareness of perceiving the man suffering as she leads him on, yet there is no
mention of this from the narrator. Therefore, one can assume that it is Sue’s own suffering that
makes her remorseful of the situation, displaying her spoiled quality clearly.
Sue is referred to a bird both literally and metaphorically at several points in the novel,
each instance demonstrating her feelings of being caged in and kept from her freedom. The first
time the narrator references her with bird imagery is while she is still married to and living with
Phillotson, she “made a little nest for herself in the very cramped quarters the closet afforded”
(212). The word “nest” conjures images of a bird creating a home for itself, something Sue has
not been able to do in Phillotson’s house as of yet. She would rather sleep in a closet than lie
down next to her husband in his room. This illustrates Sue’s fear of intimacy that was eluded to
earlier: she is unable to physically be with Phillotson even though she says she loves him.
Therefore, Sue creates her own space to sleep in separate from Phillotson, attempting to free
herself from the marriage. The second reference occurs when Sue has finally agreed to marry
Jude, Sue is in fact the one that makes the reference stating “Times had decidedly changed. ‘The
little bird is caught at last!’ she said, a sadness showing in her smile” (258). Sue is directly
implying that Jude is stripping her of a freedom she can only maintain separate from marriage.
She immediately views Jude as a captor imprisoning her body, mind, and soul. The final
comparison between Sue and bird imagery is metaphorically achieved. When Sue and Jude find
themselves in a difficult and tight financial situation they have to sell most of their possessions,
including pigeons that Sue keeps as pets. After they have been sold to a butcher the narrator

92
describes this scene: “An emotion at sight of them, assisted by the growing dusk of evening,
caused her to act on impulse, and first looking around her quickly, she pulled out the peg which
fastened down the cover, and went on. The cover lifted from within, and the pigeons flew away
with a clatter” (296). Sue releases the birds from their imprisonment and from their fate,
something she wishes she could do for herself. The act of releasing the pigeons symbolizes
Sue’s own want to escape her own fate, since the bird’s fate is death one can assume that Sue
believes her marriage and life are a slow death of her soul and intellect. She wants to free herself
from the confines that society’s rule have placed on her, especially within the institution of
marriage.
As mentioned earlier, Sue appears to be the opposite of everything that Arabella’s
character is. When Arabella is first described the narrator states “She was a complete and
substantial an animal—no more, no less” (33), introducing a woman who is viewed for her
voluptuous exterior rather than her mind. Since the word “animal” is used in the description one
can assume that Arabella is meant to evoke the carnal passions within Jude and not portray
anything further than that.

In contrast to this carnal woman is Sue who, as has been

demonstrated earlier, indulges in her intellect rather than any erotic passions. Sue is unable to
give into any carnal desires, believing that expanding her mind and maintaining male friendships
is preferable. Therefore, Sue is everything that Arabella is not and creates a dichotomy between
these two characters. As eluded to earlier, the reason Sue eventually marries Jude is in spite of
Arabella’s return.

There is a revealing scene in which the reader can observe Sue doing

something that she has never shown any inclination of doing before Arabella’s presence,
Arabella lay facing the windows, and did not at once turn her head: and Sue was
wicked enough despite her penitence, to wish for a moment that Jude could

93
behold her forerunner now, with the daylight full upon her. She may have seemed
handsome enough in profile under lamps, but a frowziness was apparent this
morning; and the sight of her own fresh charms in the looking-glass made Sue’s
manner bright, till she reflected what a meanly sexual emotion this was in her, and
hated herself for it. (258)
Sue is observing Arabella while she is in an element of vulnerability and simplicity. She has the
ability to look at Arabella in her natural form as she is sleeping and truly see who she is. Sue
notes that Arabella is not as pretty as she seems in unnatural light and wishes that Jude would be
able to see her now in the natural light of the morning. Then Sue observes her own reflection in
a mirror and for the first time in the novel, she indulges in her own beauty. Sue is proud of her
looks in this moment of comparison between the two characters. However, she realizes that
what she is doing is evoking sexual emotions within her self, something that goes against her
character and beliefs completely. Sue slowly becomes aware of this fact and chastises herself for
this indulgence.

Sue forgets herself in this moment while she’s near Arabella, who is

unconsciously bringing out the carnal nature in Sue.
Although Arabella displaces Sue in her mindset against marrying Jude, the two still do
not wed. However, once Father Time enters into the lives of Jude and Sue, it appears Sue can no
longer ward off the impending nuptials between her and Jude. However, Sue has not begun to
completely break down from her original character and is able to use her wiles once more to
convince Jude that marriage would be pointless,
‘But having been awakened to [marriage’s] awful solemnity as we have, or at
least as I have, by experience, and to my own too squeamish feelings perhaps
sometimes, it really does seem immoral in me to go and undertake the same thing

94
again with open eyes…We are a weak, tremulous pair, Jude, and what others may
feel confident in I feel doubts of—my being proof against the sordid conditions of
a business contract again!’ (275)
Sue uses the pronoun “we” twice within the quote to project onto Jude her own feelings about a
marriage between the two of them, she corrects herself the first time and then does not the
second time. It is Sue’s subtle way of suggesting and manipulating Jude to feel the same way
she does about marriage. She suggests that their previous experiences in marriage have opened
their eyes to the harsh realities that the institution of marriage holds. Sue believes that the two of
them are too weak to stand up against the demands that the bond of marriage would place on
them. This is one of the last moments of defiance that Sue has in favor of her own opinions and
beliefs.
Sue begins to reveal that how society perceives her character affects her more than one
would believe. As she is having a conversation with Jude, Sue states “‘I can’t bear that they, and
everybody, should think people wicked because they may have chosen to live their own way! It
is really these opinions that make the best intentioned people reckless, and actually become
immoral!’” (292), demonstrating the infiltration into Sue’s conscious of the public’s opinion of
her chosen lifestyle. Sue believes that society should not judge the way she has chosen to live
with Jude and the fact that she is being judged makes society the immoral collective and not
herself. There is one moment in which the couple attempt to quell the gossip that their neighbors
have been circulating by leaving town to get married “but the mistake as it was called of their
going away so secretly to do business, kept up much of the mystery of their lives…A living
mystery was not much less interesting than a dead scandal” (287). Although Sue is fighting for

95
her choice of lifestyle, she is revealing to the reader a sense of vulnerability and weakness to
what is being said about her that was not portrayed earlier in the text.
Before Father Time commits the horrendous act of murdering his siblings and himself
due to the overwhelming age of modernity, Sue depicts a further weakening in her character.
After perceiving Phillotson while walking around town Sue describes what she felt upon seeing
him to Jude, “‘But I am weak. Although I know it is all right with our plans, I felt a curious
dread of him—an awe, or terror, of conventions I don’t believe in. It comes over me at times
like a sort of creeping paralysis, and makes me so sad!’” (319). The quote further illustrates
Sue’s eventual surrender to society and its institutions. Sue admits to Jude that she feels herself
growing weaker in her character, believing that it is because of her ensuing weakness that she
feels a sense of dread upon seeing Phillotson in the street. Whether it is the guilt of having led
Phillotson on or dissolving the marriage they had, Sue is beginning to believe in the bond that the
institution of marriage places on two individuals.
Father Time is portrayed as a character overcome by the modernity that is infiltrating
society. He is a child that is aware of the trials and tribulations found in adulthood that
characters such as Jude and Sue are yet aware of. However, Sue places herself in the role of a
mother to Father Time and believes she is the one to provoke Father Time’s decision to kill
himself and his siblings. Father Time questions if it is because of the children in Sue’s life that
they cannot find lodgings at a financially unstable moment in their lives. Sue answers in the
affirmative and then proceeds to truthfully tell Father Time that there is another child about to
enter their lives. This information overwhelms Father Time and he blames Sue for bringing
another child into the world, stating that she had “‘done o’ purpose’” (323). Sue regrets having
been truthful to Father Time about the new baby and views the information as the tipping point

96
for Father Time. The fact that Sue relays this information to Father Time highlights her childlike
persona. She told Father Time about the other baby in a moment of frustration and unawareness
that she is talking to an upset child, Sue did not think about the outcome this information may
have on Father Time.
After all her children have died, the reader finds the truth in a statement made earlier by
Jude, “‘Sue, sometimes, when I am vexed with you, I think you are incapable of real love’”
(231). Sue’s reaction to the death of her children illustrate that she is capable of real love,
something that completely reverts her from the previous character she had been. After their
death she continuously states “‘O, O my babies! They had done no harm! Why should they
have been taken away, and not I!’” (326), displaying repentance and guilt on Sue’s conscious.
She clearly loved her children and is not able to understand why they have been taken away from
he. Therefore, she believes that it is because of something wrong she did in her life that she is
now being punished for. Sue comes to the epiphany that it is both her and Jude’s lifestyle that
was at fault,
‘We went about loving each other too much—indulging in ourselves to utter
selfishness with each other! We said—do you remember?—that we would make
a virtue of joy. I said it was Nature’s intention, Nature’s law and raison d’etre that
we should be joyful in what instincts she afforded us—instincts which civilization
had taken upon itself to thwart. What dreadful things I said! And now Fate has
given us this stab in the back for being such fools as to take Nature at her word!’
(328)
Sue strongly believes that Jude and herself were too selfish in their relationship and should have
been more aware of how they were perceived by those around them, namely society. She blames

97
herself for following the rules of Nature instead of society’s rules; finally giving in to the
institutions and civilization she has been so against throughout the novel. Sue is repenting for
the lifestyle she adamantly wanted with Jude and views fate as punishing her for it. It is
interesting that Sue uses the term “nature” as the guidelines she had been following throughout
the novel because she never directly refers to it in her conversations with Jude. Nature also
becomes a proper noun in this moment, emphasizing the role as a form of an institution it is
enacting for Sue.
After the death of her children Sue is a completely transformed character. The narrator
shows the reader how drastically Sue has changed after the death of her children from the
character she once was,
Sue and himself had mentally travelled in opposite directions since the tragedy:
events which had enlarged his own views of life, laws, customs, and dogmas, had
not operated in the same manner on Sue’s. She was no longer the same as in the
independent days, when her intellect played like lambent lightning over
conventions and formalities which he at that time respected, though he did not
now. (333)
The narrator compares the effect of the tragedy on both Sue and Jude. Jude grows in the way he
is viewing life and society, while Sue backtracks in her views and becomes a different woman.
The woman she is becoming does not use her intelligence to her advantage in life anymore and
because of this Jude is beginning to loose respect for her. Sue is becoming everything she was
against and is unable to live with herself without her children. This demonstrates that her love
for them exceeded beyond what the narrator portrayed when they were still living.
Sue begins to not only reflect society but also Christianity, believing her children died as

98
punishment for her way of living. Instead of being associated with bird imagery she is now
represented alongside Christian imagery, identifying her repentance. Jude finds out that she goes
to church every evening, finding her laying “prostrate on the paving” (338) beneath the church’s
cross. This is not the same Sue who was able to purchase Pagan idols on the street or live
unmarried with a man. In fact the last time Sue sees Jude “she knelt down again, and stopped
her ears with her hands till all possible sound of him had passed away” (378), which signifies a
religious connotation. Sue kneels down and clasps her hand to her ears, an almost prayer-like
action, as if she is praying to purge herself of Jude entirely.
Sue becomes convinced that the marriage she had with Phillotson is still in effect because
of the lawful marriage bond and that this is one of the main reasons that her children were taken
away from her. She states “ ‘My children—are dead—and it is right that they should be! I am
glad—almost. They were sin-begotten. They were sacrificed to teach me how to live!—their
death was the first stage of my purification. That’s why they have not died in vain!’” (352),
relaying to Jude that what they had together was not real because society did not recognize it.
Sue’s children were taken away from her in order to open her eyes to the life she was sinfully
leading; they died for a reason in Sue’s clouded mind. Therefore, in order to heed the message
of her children’s death Sue reclaims her marriage with Phillotson.
Although Sue’s fate does not end in demise like Tess and Eustacia, she reaches a
metaphorical death by the end of the novel. Sue is unable to maintain her mindset after her
children’s death and society’s pressures overcome her. Unlike Tess who is able to discard
society and attempt to correct her problems in life, Sue surrenders herself to everything that she
stood against in the start of the novel: both the institutions of marriage and Christian religion
triumph over Sue. Sue becomes a displaced character and is unable to correct the wrongs that

99
have been placed on her. She surrenders herself to the institution of marriage, releasing all her
own opinions and becoming a passive character unable to be united with Jude. Out of the four
female protagonists, Sue Bridehead is the most advanced in her understanding of the role her
gender plays in society and the need for change as modernity rises. Her character shows the
evolution of Hardy’s female protagonist. However, Sue never reaches a moment of tragic
awareness to overcome her past and falls short in comparison to Tess.

100

WORKS CITED

Bayley, John. An Essay on Hardy. Oxford: Cambridge UP, 1978. Print.
Boumelha, Penny. Thomas Hardy and Women: Sexual Ideology and Narrative Form. Madison,
Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin, 1985. Print.
Hardy, Thomas. Far From the Madding Crowd. Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Classics, 1993.
Print.
Hardy, Thomas. Jude the Obscure. Ed. Patricia Ingham. New York, NY: Oxford UP, 2008. Print.
Hardy, Thomas. Tess of the D'Urbervilles. Ed. Cynthia B. Johnson. New York, NY: Pocket, June
2006. Print.
Hardy, Thomas. The Return of the Native. Ed. Simon Gatrell. New York, NY: Oxford UP, 2008.
Print.
Ingham, Patricia. "Chapter 5- Social Issues: Women and Society." Thomas Hardy. New York,
NY: Oxford UP, 2003. 129-52. Print.
Morgan, Rosemarie. Women and Sexuality in the Novels of Thomas Hardy. London: Routledge,
1988. Print.
Wright, T. R. Hardy and His Readers. Houndmills [U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 85-86.
Amazon. Web. 4 Apr. 2012. <http://www.amazon.com/Hardy-His-Readers-TWright/dp/0333962605>.

101

WORKS CONSULTED

Beer, Gillian. Darwin's Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George Eliot and Nineteenth
Century Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2000. Print.
Guerard, Albert J., ed. Hardy: A Collection of Critical Essays. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
1963. Print.
Hardy, Thomas. The Complete Poetical Works of Thomas Hardy. Ed. Samuel Hynes. Oxford:
Clarendon, 1982. Print.
Higonnet, Margaret R., ed. The Sense of Sex: Feminist Perspectives on Hardy. Urbana and
Chicago: University of Illinois, 1993. Print.
Irwin, Michael. Reading Hardy's Landscapes. London: Palgrave, 2000. Print.
Mitchell, Judith. "Chapter 16: Hardy and Gender." The Ashgate Research Companion to
Thomas Hardy. Ed. Rosemarie Morgan. Surrey: Ashgate, 2010. 301-14. Print.
Steel, Gayla R. Sexual Tyranny in Wessex: Hardy's Witches and Demons of Folklore. New
York: Peter Lang, 1993. Print.
Stubbs, Patricia. "Chapter 4: Thomas Hardy, A Study in Contradiction." Women and Fiction:
Feminism and the Novel 1880-1920. Sussex: Harvester Limited, 1979. 58-87. Print.
Tanner, Tony. "Color and Movement in Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles." Thomas Hardy's
Tess of the D'Urbervilles. Ed. Harold Bloom. New York: Chelsea House, 1987. 9-24.

102

Print.
Tomalin, Claire. Thomas Hardy. New York: Penguin, 2007. Print.

