Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2014

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2014

Towards a Poetics of the Notebook: From Dorothy
Wordsworth to Philippe Jaccottet
Hannah Phoebe LeClair
Bard College

Recommended Citation
LeClair, Hannah Phoebe, "Towards a Poetics of the Notebook: From Dorothy Wordsworth to Philippe Jaccottet" (2014). Senior
Projects Spring 2014. Paper 311.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2014/311

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2014 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Towards a Poetics of the Notebook: From Dorothy Wordsworth to Philippe Jaccottet

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

by
Hannah Phoebe LeClair

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2014

Acknowledgements
I want to thank the following people, who’ve borne with me all this time and kept me sane and
inspired: My family, Will, and my dear friends at Bard. This project is for all of you, without
whom the past four years would not have been what they were.
The writing of this project would not have been possible without the help of the following
teachers: I thank my adviser, Éric Trudel, for his unwavering encouragement and patience with
me over the course of the year. Deirdre d’Albertis introduced me to Dorothy Wordsworth’s
journals for the first time, and offered invaluable comments on the project’s second chapter.
Michael Ives introduced me to the work of Philippe Jaccottet, and guided my own attempts to
struggle from notes towards a poem to the poem itself. Marina van Zuylen taught me to refuse
the sufferings of a Princesse de Clèves in my academic life at Bard by encouraging me to seek
out a course of study that has offered me many pleasures as well as many challenges.

Table of Contents
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................1
Chapter One .....................................................................................................................................6
1. Introduction: The “lyric subject” and the “autobiographical subject” .....................................6
2. “Terms of an engagement voluntarily contracted”:The Lectoral Pact .....................................8
3. “The Prelude”: Narrating Writing as Process ........................................................................16
4. “My dear, dear Sister!”: Experience Mediated and Unmediated in “Tintern Abbey” ...........21
Chapter Two...................................................................................................................................24
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................24
2. “Her taste a perfect electrometer—…”: Approaching Dorothy Wordsworth ........................25
3. The Alfoxden Journal .............................................................................................................29
Chapter Three.................................................................................................................................43
1. Scenes of Composition ...........................................................................................................43
2. “Subtle Process”: Wordsworth’s Poetics of Continuity .........................................................50
3. Poetics of Discontinuity, or Towards a Poetics of the Notebook ...........................................52
Chapter Four ..................................................................................................................................56
1. The Notebook and its Pretexts ...............................................................................................56
2.Object and Territory: Notebooks and their Readers................................................................56
3. Practice and Poetics of the Notebook in Philippe Jaccottet’s La Semaison ...........................66
Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................80
Works Cited ...................................................................................................................................84

1

Introduction
In a conversation with poet and critic Aubrey de Vere, Wordsworth reportedly denounced
the practice of a fellow poet who brought notebook and pencil with him on his walks through the
countryside. David Perkins, the author of Wordsworth and the Poetics of Sincerity, relates de
Vere’s anecdote:
With “flashing eye and impassioned voice,” [de Vere writes,] Wordsworth declared that
pencil and notebook should have been left at home. “Then, after several days had passed
by, he should have interrogated his memory as to the scene. He would have discovered
that while much of what he had admired was preserved to him, much was also wisely
obliterated. That which remained—the picture surviving in his mind—would have
presented the ideal and essential truth of the scene.” (Perkins 69)
Perkins describes Wordsworth as a writer so averse to putting pen to paper that “[t]o hold a pen
gave him, he said, all kinds of bodily uneasiness, and he would usually dictate poems or even
letters to various feminine transcribers” (Perkins 86)—that is, his wife Mary or daughter Dora.
But his most important amanuensis was his sister, Dorothy Wordsworth.
“[T]hou, my dearest Friend […] My dear, dear Sister!” William writes, in Lines Written
a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey. It was Dorothy who most involved in his process of
composition, shared most closely his poetic commitments and, throughout their life together,
served as his most important emotional and artistic support. While William was vehemently
denouncing the practice of notekeeping, Dorothy was busy recording her impressions of their
surroundings, the weather, the daily toil of household chores, and long walks made alone with
William or in the company of Coleridge, in the notebooks that long after her death would be
published as The Grasmere and Alfoxden Journals.
In the Grasmere Journal, Dorothy writes,
Sunday Morning 5th October. Coleridge read a 2nd time Christabel—we had increasing
pleasure. A delicious morning. Wm & I were employed all morning in writing an
addition to the preface. Wm. went to bed very ill after working after dinner—Coleridge &

2

I walked to Ambleside after dark with the letter. Returned to tea at 9 o’clock. Wm still in
bed & very ill. (Journals 24)
Meanwhile, William is making himself ill with the effort of drafting the “Preface” to Lyrical
Ballads, composing phrases like these: “I have said that Poetry is the spontaneous overflow of
powerful feelings: it takes its origin from emotion recollected in tranquility: the emotion is
contemplated till by a species of reaction the tranquility disappears, and an emotion, kindred to
that which was before the subject of contemplation, is gradually produced, and does itself
actually exist in the mind” (Works 611). This is how William envisions the scene of composition:
as a spontaneous moment in which the poem emerges out of the tranquility of the poet’s quiet
mind, suddenly entire, fully fledged, turbulent, and substantial. There is a discrepancy between
these accounts that can’t be ignored. What it reveals is the mythic character of Wordsworth’s
vision of the writing process, which obscures and renders invisible the real work of literary
production.
The poet’s refusal of the notebook, reluctance to pick up his pencil, and preference for
dictation over writing, signal that the writing process he imagines in the “Preface” the Lyrical
Ballads is not quite true to life. It suggests to me a pressing need to return to Dorothy
Wordsworth’s journals, which belong to the space in which it seems the poet’s work is really
taking place: the space embodied by the Wordsworth sibling’s collaborative relationship; the
dailyness of their shared life and work. Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals represent a record of life
and work intimately shared with her famous brother, but they hardly fit the model of the diary or
journal intime. They have little to reveal about the personalities of William Wordsworth or
Coleridge, and almost nothing about Dorothy’s own literary efforts. What is most intriguing
about them is that they seem to offer pellucid glimpses of everyday life that, cumulatively,
present an apparently authentic sense of what her life with William was like. And yet, that shared

3

life somehow remains just out of reach, at the margins of this (already marginal) text. No wonder
we can hardly refrain from circling back to it: Dorothy’s relationship with William frames, and
even charges her prose—with a love that is everywhere and nowhere, and is their unseen pretext.
This story of shared work and shared life is, in a way, my pretext.
William’s poetry and Dorothy’s journals represent, conceptually, two facets of the
relationship between the theory and practice of poetry, and raise pressing questions about the
interactions between “life” and the work of literature, the registers of the lyrical and the
autobiographical, experience and its representation in language. A study of Dorothy
Wordsworth’s notebooks opens space for movement between these categories.
Dorothy Wordsworth’s notebooks represent a fault-line in the canon. She was not a poet,
but Coleridge once wrote of her,
Her manners are simple, ardent, impressive…Her information various—her eye watchful
in minutest observation of nature—and her taste a perfect electrometer—it bends,
protrudes, and draws in, at its subtlest beauties & most recondite faults. (Coleridge, c.
July 3, 1797 qtd. Woof 130)
Does it matter—or, how much does it matter—that according to the literary canon and according
to traditional generic distinctions, Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals don’t represent the trace of
any “work” of her own except, perhaps, her life itself? In response, I want to pose the following
question: How might we talk about Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals as literary works in their
own right, that could stand alongside her brother’s writing? Her notebooks are filled with the
very stuff of life, but I want to draw attention to their literariness, their self-conscious
constructedness. But how to describe the “poetic” project that seems to grow out of her journals?
The text accumulates a shape, an arc that tempts us to describe it in narrative terms
because of the way, in retrospect, we can trace the passage of the time it documents. What
vocabulary, then, could be employed to describe the flowering of something that looks very

4

much like a deliberate project in a notebook like Dorothy Wordsworth’s journal—something that
captures an eddy of time during which the force and flow of sustained attention, focused interest,
and literary shape is momentarily discernible? In answer to those questions, I want to the
reader’s attention on the tools William Wordsworth rejects in that brief anecdote related by
Aubrey de Vere. This project proposes a revisiting of Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals through
the lens of a “poetics of the notebook.” The notebook, occupying ambiguous territory between
theory and practice, is the space in which the “work” of writing takes place.
To that end, chapter one opens with an exploration of the hopes and limits of William
Wordsworth’s poetics in the 1802 “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads. Through readings of the
beginning of Book I of The Prelude and “Lines Written a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey,” I
probe Wordsworth’s vexed relationship with a process of composition that paradoxically seems
to hinder all of the poet’s efforts to be a participant in the world of things. Chapter two is a study
of Dorothy Wordsworth’s Alfoxden Journal, in which I sharpen my focus on the questions I have
raised about the status of Dorothy’s work as I search for a vocabulary with which to describe the
journal’s project.
Chapter three returns us to Wordsworth’s efforts to grapple with the problem of the
process of writing and the relationship between the poem and its reader. In the later Essays upon
Epitaphs, Wordsworth returns to the questions he raises in the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads with
renewed urgency: How can the poet communicate the singularity of his experience in a
conventional medium, and how can the poem authenticate itself, guaranteeing its speaker’s
sincerity? The epitaph becomes an exemplary form and Essays upon Epitaphs seems to offer a
provisional metaphor for describing the relationship between William’s poetry and Dorothy
Wordsworth’s journals—the document as monument—but comes with its own limitations.

5

Chapter four represents an attempt to refine my understanding of what a “poetics of the
notebook” might mean, and what possibilities it might offer for describing Dorothy
Wordsworth’s work. In doing so, I turn to the work twentieth-century French poet Philippe
Jaccottet as a case study. Jaccottet’s integrative efforts to mediate the poem and its “pre-text”
extend and disrupt the lyric tradition that describes the work of both Wordsworth siblings. In his
notebook, published as La Semaison, carnets 1954-1979, Jaccottet asks, “But how do you
proceed from a number of ‘notes toward a poem’ to the poem itself?” If the poetics of the
notebook serves as a new lens for understanding the status of Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals, I
want to extend that reading to a new appreciation of the way the uncertain, often prefatory status
of William Wordsworth’s canonical works opens up possibilities for re-evaluating the
relationships they establish between poet and reader and the registers of the lyrical and the
autobiographical.

6

CHAPTER 1

1. Introduction: The “lyric subject” and the “autobiographical subject”
In “La référence dédoublée: Le sujet lyrique entre fiction et autobiographie,” Dominique
Combe begins with an exposé of the notion of the lyric subject, that is, the voice of the poet as it
is enunciated within the poem. He writes,
L’hypothèse d’un “Moi lyrique” ou d’un “sujet lyrique” a connu un fortune considérable
dans la critique et la théorie littéraire de langue allemande, qui oppose volontiers un
lyrisches Ich dans la poésie au sujet « réel », « authentique », ou encore « empirique » à
l’œuvre dans la prose, et surtout dans les genres autobiographiques. Cette opposition
s’établit sur le thème toujours controversé de la référence dans le discours poétique, et sur
le rapport entre la poésie lyrique et la fiction. (Combe 39)1
According to Combe, the “lyric subject” marks the meeting point between fiction and the lyric. I
want to argue that taking into consideration the relationship between the “lyric subject” and the
“empirical subject” is crucial for any investigation of a poet’s work with an interest in the
connections between primary texts—the poetry, the poet’s own articulations of the poetics
underlying that work— and what we know of that poet’s life, and the body of criticism that
shows us the different ways in which all this information might be contextualized and
interpreted.
In the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, William Wordsworth turns his attention to precisely
these kinds of questions. He writes,
1

N.B.: Throughout the text, I will offer my own translations of sources where a version in English was
not readily available. In the notes that follow, translations will be my own unless I indicate otherwise.
“The hypothesis of a “lyric ‘I’” or a “lyric subject” has had lasting importance in German literary theory
and criticism, which sets a poetic lyrisches Ich in opposition with the “real,” “authentic” or “empirical”
subject of the prose work, especially in the autobiographical genres. This opposition establishes itself on
the perennially controversial theme of referentiality in poetic discourse, and on the relationship between
lyric poetry and fiction” (Combe 39).

7

Taking up the subject, then, upon general grounds, I ask what is meant by the word Poet?
What is a Poet? To whom does he address himself? An what language is to be expected
from him? (Major Works 603)
In this chapter, I turn my attention to the ways in which Wordsworth addresses himself to those
questions, with Combe’s notion of the relationship between the “lyric subject” and the “empirical
subject” in mind. In the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, one of the founding documents of the
Romantic tradition, Wordsworth articulates notions about who the poet is, what his poetry does,
and in what sort of relationship he stands with his audience that continue to inform critical
traditions of thinking about poetry and how it works. Wordsworth’s ideas in the “Preface”
propose ideas about language and the poet’s subjectivity that represent an indictment of poetic
convention. While they propose a break with conventional notions of the poet’s relationship to
his audience, they also enforce that relationship by rearticulating the terms of a lectoral pact, an
“engagement…voluntarily contracted” (Major Works 596) between poet and audience.
As we will see, for Wordsworth, to write poetry is to step into a public arena; to address
humankind at large. I want to unspool the complications and difficulties inherent in this project
and expose the problems inherent in the way that that lectoral pact contains, implicitly, the
promise of an equivalence between the identity of the poet and the identity of the speaker in the
poem; between the scene of experience and the scene of composition. The purpose of this
chapter is to explore the possibilities and limits of Wordsworth’s poetics and practice through an
examination of two of his poems, the first book of his autobiographical epic, The Prelude and
“Lines written a few miles above Tintern Abbey.”

8

2. “Terms of an engagement voluntarily contracted”: The Lectoral Pact
In the 1802 “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, William Wordsworth rails against what he
perceives as the “triviality and meanness of thought and language” (Major Works 597) endemic
to the poetry of his contemporaries. Their language, he asserts, is dictated by conventional
“habits of association” (Major Works 596) to such an extent that its forms are devoid of
meaning. The experiments in verse that Wordsworth has undertaken in Lyrical Ballads attempt
to disrupt those habits and unsettle those conventions. To that end, Wordsworth warns the reader
that “there will be little…found in these volumes of what is usually called poetic diction; I have
taken as much pains to avoid it as others ordinarily take to produce it” (Major Works 600).
Wordsworth’s project in Lyrical Ballads involves an assault on the meaning of “poetic diction”
as it has been traditionally conceived.
He is aware that many will read the language and contents of his poems as anti-poetic,
and he deliberately frames his project as a refusal to conform to the expectations a reader might
bring to his work, by challenging the notion that the contents of a poem respond to ideas about
poetry shared by poet and reader. Wordsworth writes,
It is supposed, that by the act of writing in verse an Author makes a formal engagement
that he will gratify certain known habits of association; that he not only apprizes the
Reader that certain classes of ideas and expressions will be found in his book, but that
others will be carefully excluded. […] I will not take it upon me to determine the exact
import of the promise by which the act of writing in verse an Author, in the present day,
makes to his Reader; but I am certain, it will appear to many persons that I have not
fulfilled the terms of an engagement thus voluntarily contracted. (Major Works 596).
These sentences make it clear that Wordsworth stages his poetics within the bounds of a
particular relationship between poet and audience, a relationship in which the audience has
certain expectations (which may not be satisfied) and the poet has a particular task to
accomplish. The lectoral pact Wordsworth articulates and, nearly in the same breath, betrays, is

9

the kind of rule that exists to be broken: This rhetorical movement helps Wordsworth insist that
his work takes place outside of the conventional language of poetry altogether and says
something true or absolutely sincere about the way “language and the human mind act and re-act
on each other” (Major Works 596).
Though he writes, “I will not take it upon me to determine the exact import of the
promise by which the act of writing in verse an Author, in the present day, makes to his Reader,”
it is clear that this refusal to comment on the terms of his lectoral pact is in itself a kind of
answer: Wordsworth proposes himself as a poet whose work takes place outside the bounds of
poetry. At the same time, it is also clear that Wordsworth’s poetics depend on the existence of
an “engagement” between poet and audience, even if it is necessarily a frustrated relationship. It
is only by at once insisting upon and dismissing the constraint of the lectoral pact that
Wordsworth is able “to bring [his] language nearer to the language of men, and further…[to
impart] pleasure of a very different kind from that which is supposed by many persons to be the
proper object of poetry” (Major Works 600).
Implicitly, Wordsworth substitutes a new promise in place of the terms of that
“engagement thus voluntarily contracted,” and voluntarily broken. Instead of the guarantee of the
fulfillment of “certain known habits of association,” the inclusion of certain classes of ideas and
expressions” and the careful exclusion of others, this new pact promises an equivalence between
the language of the poet, “the passions of men” and the “beautiful and permanent forms of
nature” (Major Works 597). “Accordingly,” Wordsworth writes, “Such a language, arising out of
repeated experience and regular feelings, is a more permanent and a far more philosophical
language, than that which is frequently substituted for it by poets” (Major Works 597). But what

10

must the poet do in order to bring his language “nearer to the language of men” (Major Works
600)?
Wordsworth proposes that the poet is specially equipped to address the reader in such
language. He is “a man…endued with a more lively sensibility, more enthusiasm and tenderness,
who has a greater knowledge of human nature, and a more comprehensive soul, than are
possessed among mankind” (Major Works 603). The poet is better equipped than most of us to
speak about experiences outside of his own because
He has a…disposition to be affected more than other men by absent things as if they were
present; an ability of conjuring up in himself passions, which are indeed far from being
the same as those produced by real events, yet (especially in those parts of the general
sympathy which are pleasing and delightful) do more nearly resemble the passions
produced by real events, than any thing which, from the motions of their own minds
merely, other men are accustomed to feel in themselves; whence, and from practice, he
has acquired a greater readiness and power in expressing what he thinks and feels, and
especially those thoughts and feelings which, by his own choice, or from the structure of
his own mind, arise in him without immediate external excitement. (Major Works 603604)
This passage contains the suggestion that what distinguishes the poet from humankind at large is
a special faculty. Wordsworth, following Locke’s philosophy of language, starts with the
premise that our language is a conventional one that accretes through habitual use. Because the
poet is one naturally affected “by absent things as if they were present,” and because he is gifted
with a special ability to “conjur[e] up in himself passions,” he is able to hone this facility for
expression through practice, opening himself to unusual habits of association and becoming a
kind of conduit for “those thoughts and feelings which, by his own choice, or from the structure
of his own mind, arise in him without immediate external excitement” (Major Works 604).
Wordsworth’s Lockean heritage evidently causes him some anxiety. If the poet is simply
more practiced at expressing his thoughts and feelings than the rest of us, does that make him a
mere technician? In the case of even the greatest poet, Wordsworth acknowledges,

11

…there cannot be a doubt but that the language which [his faculty] will suggest to him,
must, in liveliness and truth, fall far short of that which is uttered by men in real life,
under the actual pressure of those passions, certain shadows of which the Poet thus
produces, or feels to be produced in himself. However exalted a notion we would wish to
cherish of the character of a Poet, it is obvious, that, while he describes and imitates
passions, his situation is altogether slavish and mechanical, compared with the freedom
and power of real and substantial action and suffering. (Major Works 604)
Even more pressing than the acknowledged concern that if the poet is merely responding to
practiced habits of association is an anxiety about what that idea might imply about the truthvalue of the poet’s language. If the poet writes about thoughts and feelings he hasn’t experienced
first-hand, how can his words be more than “certain shadows which the Poet..produces, or feels
to be produced within himself”? Furthermore, the status of the poet’s work seems to be called
into question: what is the moral value of his task “compared with the freedom and power of real
and substantial action and suffering?”
Wordsworth negotiates these two problems by insisting on the power of the poet’s
subjectivity to surmount them. The poet’s goal must be “to bring his feelings near to those of
persons whose feelings he describes, nay, for short spaces of time perhaps, to let himself slip into
an entire delusion, and even confound his own feelings with theirs, modifying only the language
that is thus suggested to him by a consideration that he describes for a particular purpose, that of
giving pleasure” (Major Works 604). In other words, it would seem that the poet is, in fact,
capable of participating in the “power of real and substantial action and suffering.” His superior
sense of sympathy makes it possible for him to come so near to the experiences of others that
sometimes he “slip[s] into an entire delusion, even confound[ing] his feelings with theirs”
(Major Works 604). Language seems to be the only condition that makes that confusion delusive,
but Wordsworth insists that language is a medium—its function is to elevate and rarify and

12

transmit, to make it possible for the poet to carry his purpose which is, always and above all,
“that of giving pleasure.”
This is, perhaps, a solution that compounds the difficulties it wishes away. The way in
which Wordsworth negotiates the problem of bringing poetry nearer to the “language really used
by men” and bringing his feelings near to those of the people and situations he wants to describe,
foregrounds once again the notion of the lectoral pact. Now, it becomes quite clear that
Wordsworth’s promise of an equivalence between the poet’s language, the “passions of men”
and the “beautiful and permanent forms of nature” redirects the burden of proof that this
guarantee has been fulfilled from the poet’s work (and the extent to which it satisfies a common
understanding of certain poetic conventions) and on to the poet himself. This promise of
equivalence can now be understood as the promise of an autobiographical link—between the
identity of the poet and the speaker in the poem; between the scene of experience and the scene
of composition. In “La référence dédoublée,” Dominique Combe writes,
La genèse du concept de « sujet lyrique » est donc inséparable de la question des rapports
entre la littérature et la biographie, et du problème de la « référentialité » de l’œuvre
littéraire. Mais, à bien réfléchir aux implications de cette hypothèse, il semble que le sujet
« lyrique ne s’oppose pas tant au sujet « empirique, » « réel »-à la personne de l’auteur--,
par définition extérieure à la littérature et au langage, qu’au sujet « autobiographique »,
qui est l’expression littéraire de ce sujet « empirique ». Le poète lyrique ne s’oppose pas
tant à l’auteur qu’à l’autobiographie comme sujet de l’énonciation et de l’énoncé.
(Combe 50)2
He suggests that the notion of the “lyric subject” is inextricably linked to the relationship
between literature and biography. This is to say, if lyric poetry proposes a speaker who purports
“The origins of the concept « lyric subject » are therefore inseparable from the question of the
relationship between literature and biography, or from the problem of « referentiality » in the work of
literature. In order to think through the implications of this hypothesis, it seems that the “lyric” subject is
not so much opposed to the “empirical,” “real” subject—the author, by definition exterior to literature and
language--, as to the “autobiographical” subject, who is the literary expression of that “empirical” subject.
The lyric poet is not so much opposed to the author as to the autobiography itself, as a subject who
enunciates and is enunciated” (Combe 50).
2

13

to voice his own experience in a poem, what’s at stake is not so much an equivalence between
the “empirical” subjectivity of the writer, who we understand to exist outside of literature and
language altogether, but rather a link between the “autobiographical” and the “lyric” subjectivity
of the writer. As Combe puts it, this is an opposition between “le sujet de l’enonciation et de
l’énoncé.”
Combe’s articulation of this oppositional relationship between the what is enunciated and
the speaking subject helps pinpoint a contradiction around which Wordsworth’s reformulation of
the lectoral pact revolves: How can the poet’s subjective experience be conveyed as wholly and
seamlessly as possible in a conventional language, the medium whose contents always seem to
exceed its carrying capacities, baffle communication, and throw up barriers between experience
and expression? How does the poet authentically communicate the singularity of his experience
in a conventional medium? This is the problem of language’s failure, and it is a problem that will
appear obliquely but persistently in Wordsworth’s poetry and prose as he grapples with the
question of how the poet can convey the intensity of the passions he accesses imaginatively and
through language. In other words, Wordsworth is asking, how to convey feeling, and how to do
so with sincerity?
In building this constellation of questions around the problem of sincerity and the
registers of the lyrical and the autobiographical, I take my cue from Elisabeth Cardonne-Arlyck,
who suggests that the speaker in the lyric poem (what Dominique Combe would call the “Moi
lyrique”) establishes
a tacit understanding or even a promise…a lectoral pact comparable to the one that
underwrites autobiography. According to Philipe Lejeune, the autobiographical pact “is
defined by something that is outside the text; it exists not on the inside, in the form of
some unverifiable resemblance to a real person, but rather beyond the text, in the type of
reading it engenders, the belief it secretes, which becomes legible in the text as
critique.”(Cardonne-Arlyck 584).

14

This “complicitous structure” (584) creates a direct confrontation between speaker and reader.
For Cardonne-Arlyck, this confrontation can become a model for sincerity, but only if the
question of question of autobiography (as in confession or testimony) “is inseparable from
ethics” (584). Cardonne-Arlyck locates this autobiographical turn within the lyric in contrast to
other moves by the lyric poet that might undermine the poet-speaker’s (or lyric subject’s) own
sense of subjectivity, or might be suggestive of a subjectivity so uncertain that is unable to take
responsibility for its own existence.
Within the context of the lyric, autobiography, for Cardonne-Arlyck, establishes an
ethical relationship of sincerity between persons inside of language. This autobiographical turn
in the lyric also has crucial implications for the problem of referentiality. Cardonne-Arlyck
writes,
Autobiography’s promise to relate things truthfully—untenable as it may be—differs
from the romantic claim to sincerity in that sincerity is directed toward the self, whereas
the attempt to be truthful is directed outward, toward the object and toward others. Thus,
it is not so much the ironic lack of illusions that distinguishes contemporary “personal”
poetry from its devalued lyric antecedents, but rather the direction of the discourse, and
the mode of reading it invites. The poetic engagement of the I who mobilizes life’s bits
and pieces to write “in person” (whether masked or barefaced), implies an
acknowledgement of the responsibility towards others—toward everyone touched by that
life, whether intimately or from a distance, and toward those touched by the poem, its
readers. (587)
This idea that poetry has to do with the material world—that it should be concerned with and
anchored to the materiality of objects and the ethical dimension of human relations—recalls the
moment in Wordsworth’s “Preface” where he insists on the need for “a class of poetry…well
adapted to the interest of mankind permanently, and not unimportant in the multiplicity and
quality of its moral relations” (Major Works 595). This will have to be a kind of poetry,
Wordsworth writes, “whose object is truth, not individual and local, but general, and operative,

15

not standing upon external testimony…Poetry is the image of man and nature” (Major Works
605).
Despite Cardonne-Arlyck’s contention that “autobiography’s promise to relate things
truthfully…differs from the romantic claim to sincerity,” I want to suggest that there are more
similarities than differences between Wordsworth’s notion of sincerity and Carndonne-Arlyck’s
conception of the autobiographical pact. It seems to me that what Cardonne-Arlyck proposes is
that autobiography “turn” or “moment” is the occasion for a sort of reading that is almost like a
collaboration between the reader and the writer—a writer who makes an outward gesture toward
the reader, and a reader who recognizes that gesture.
What seems most important about Cardonne-Arlyck’s comments on autobiography is not
the notion that autobiography promises to “relate things truthfully,” but that it provides an
occasion for a special, ethically motivated kind of reading. It’s a way of reading that allows us to
recognize, that, as she writes, “Structurally, lyric poetry and autobiography are linked by
enunciation and its ability to feign (Cardonne-Arlyck 582). As we have seen in Wordsworth’s
work, what is always at stake seems to be a connection or link insisted upon, but never borne out
by the poems themselves. As we have seen in the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, the poet’s central
problem remains the communication of experience in language. Wordsworth’s poetics always
seek to narrow the gap between experience and representation, and his poetry is centrally
concerned with its own failure to record experience without the loss of something. I will return
to this concern in chapter three, where I investigate Wordsworth’s return to this preoccupation in
a later work, Essays upon Epitaphs.
However, as we will see in the next sections of this chapter, perhaps Wordsworth’s
insistence on collapsing the gap between language and experience produces a poetry that

16

“feigns” the qualities of life and “substantial action,” in which the poet’s insistence on the
authenticity of his experience and the sincerity of his language always comes to the forefront.
“Feigning,” then, in autobiography and in the lyric, is a strategy for dealing with the “gap”
between experience and representation; experience mediated and experience unmediated. The
next section of this chapter turns to the opening of Book I of The Prelude, in an attempt to
illustrate just how vexed ad tenuous the relationship between the scenes of experience and
composition is for Wordsworth. In the first few stanzas of the poem, Wordsworth’s verse
narrates the writing process. In the chapter’s closing section, I find in “Lines Written a Few
Miles Above Tintern Abbey” Wordsworth’s articulation of a provisional solution for the problem
of the disjunction between experience and language—the workings of memory and recollection.
Most importantly, along with the gesture of recollection, Wordsworth introduces the figure of his
sister Dorothy, who seems to stand in for the poet’s first, unmediated experience of the scene he
revisits.

3. The Prelude: Narrating the Writing Process
What happens when the experiences the poet wants to express are his own—when he
becomes his own subject? William Wordsworth’s autobiographical epic was a work he returned
to and revised extensively throughout his life. His lifelong preoccupation with this
autobiographical work is reflected by The Prelude’s lengthy textual history—it underwent forty
years worth of revisions. The editors of the Norton Critical Edition of The Prelude remark,
It is interesting that even at [its] final stage Wordsworth did not give The Prelude a name.
He thought of it always as “the poem to Coleridge,” and as a part—first a tailpiece, then a
‘preparatory poem’—in his scheme for The Recluse, the never-completed magnum opus
that preoccupied him for much of his adult life. (J. Wordsworth et al. ix-x)

17

The Prelude is a masterpiece that is shadowed by an unachieved magnum opus, a work that
perhaps never quite gets itself off the ground and an autobiography that both forecasts its
subject’s great work and leaves the question of his success unanswered.
In the first book of The Prelude, Wordsworth explores the tension between the scene of
composition and the scene of recollection and composition. The beginning of the poem recounts
the great struggle of beginning to write in a way that is recognizably different from the processof
composition Wordsworth describes in the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads. At the outset, it is the
exterior world that captures the poet’s attention, making it nearly impossible for him to fix upon
a theme proper to his aspirations. Wordsworth’s tactics of delay, suspension, and procrastination
dramatize a narrative of writing as process.
The Prelude begins with a sense of release—the poet has just been freed from his
obligations and can quit the confinement of the city for the open countryside, “free, enfranchised
and at large” (Major Works 375.9). His departure is attended by the gusts of a “gentle breeze”—
the openings stanza of the poem turns on a play of breeze and breath, the divine afflatus of the
poet’s inspiration. As the poet sets off on his journey, he rejoices:
The earth is all before me: with a heart
Joyous, nor scared at its own liberty,
I look about, and should the guide I chuse
Be nothing better than a wandering cloud,
I cannot miss my way. I breathe again;
Trances of thought and mountings of the mind
Come fast upon me: it is shaken off,
As by miraculous gift ‘tis shaken off,
That burthen of my own unnatural self,
The heavy weight of many a weary day
Not mine, and such as were not made for me.
[…]
Long months of ease and undisturbed delight
Are mine in prospect; wither shall I turn,
By a road or pathway or through open field,
Or shall a twig or any floating thing

18

Upon the river, point me out my course? (Major Works 375.15-32)
At every turn, the speaker scans the landscape for signs that might point him in the right
direction. He looks to the wandering cloud, to the turnings of roads and pathways, even tracing
the trajectory of “any twig or floating thing/Upon the river” as though it might offer him a hint
that would point the way for him. Despite the speaker’s insistence the liberty and freedom, the
play of inhalation and exhalation that structures this stanza adds up to a series of hesitations.
“Trances of thought and mountings of the mind/Come fast” upon the speaker, but he shrugs them
off, as though resisting the heightened sensibility that poetic inspiration would produce in him.
The external world is so concrete, so available to the poet-speaker that he hardly has a
toehold in it. Though he doesn’t lack “that first great gift, that vital soul/Nor general truths which
are themselves a sort/Of elements and agents, under-powers,/Subordinate helpers of the living
mind” (379.160-164), He is burdened by desires that make it impossible for him to participate in
the “life of common things,” the world of the simple peasant—the world in which, on a pleasant
evening, it isn’t necessary “to bend the Sabbath of that time/To a servile yoke.” Words place the
poet in an uneasy relationship with time: he needs to ask that it do something for him.
Paradoxically, while the very persistence of his creative impulse seems to hinder his attempts to
make anything with words, creation will be the only way in which it is possible for the poet to
become a participant in that world of things.
Though “Eolian visitations” attend the commencement of his journey, no sooner have
their beautiful vibrations risen in his soul than “the harp/Was soon defrauded, and the banded
host/Of harmony dispersed in straggling sounds,/And lastly utter silence” (377.104-106).
Undeterred, the poet-speaker declares
…Be it so,
It is an injury…to this day

19

To think of any thing but present joy.’
So, like a peasant, I pursued my road
Beneath the evening sun, nor had one wish
Again to bend the Sabbath of that time
To a servile yoke. What need for many words?—
A pleasant loitering journey, through two days
Continued, brought me to my hermitage. (Major Works 377.108-115)
Though we can hardly expect to receive an account of what follows (“What need for many
words?”) the poet-speaker continues: For two days, he is bereft of words. This silence allows
him to experience his journey “like a peasant” (377.110)—a wordless participant in “the life/Of
common things, the endless store of things/Rare or at least so seeming” (378.118-119). For the
poet-speaker, silence is more than a relief: In it, he finds “The self-congratulation, the
complete/Composure, and the happiness entire” (378.121-122), but these feelings of
complacency prove to be unsustainable.
Silence means rest, completeness, fullness, wholeness. The poet-speaker’s feeling of
“happiness entire” suggests that the state of “composure” and the frenzy of “composition” are
contradictory ways of being. Over the course of this episode in the introduction of “The
Prelude,” the poet-speaker’s state of mind oscillates between the high pitch of apparently divine
inspiration, during the “Eolian visitation” and “utter silence.” Wordless and total participation in
the world of things, whose abundance had been plaguing him with indecision, gives way to the
aspiration “to lay up/New stores, or rescue from decay the old/By timely interference” (378.125127)
To speak, to write, to compose, is to be forced to tear oneself away from all the fullness
of wordless participation in the life of things, or perhaps to be forced to forget it. What is it that
makes the poet-speaker speak? Why is this coming to speech, coming to writing, so
excruciating? The moment in which the poet-speaker articulates his aspiration to “lay up/New

20

stores, or rescue from decay the old/By timely interference” ironically places his project into a
decidedly problematic timeframe: “infinite delay” (381.244). Unable to fix his theme, the poetspeaker writes,
…Thus from day to day
I live a mockery of the brotherhood
Of vice and virtue, with no skill to part
Vague longing that is bred by want of power,
From paramount impulse not to be withstood;
A timorous capacity, from prudence;
From circumspection, infinite delay” (Major Works 381.238-244)
What are we to make to the excruciating suspension that characterizes all of the poet-speaker’s
attempts to begin his poem, especially when we look more closely at the places in which he
attempts to envision his project?
He wants to make a rescue operation, and it seems imperative to begin as soon as
possible, before decay sets in.
Time, place, and manners, these I seek, and these
I find in plenteous store, but nowhere such
As may be singled out with steady choice—
No little band of yet remembered names
Whom I, in perfect confidence, might hope
To summon back from lonesome banishment
And make inmates in the hearts of men
Now living, or to live in times to come. (379.169-176)
Not only does the poet want to rescue and preserve, he wants to recuperate “those phantoms of
conceit,/That have been floating loose about so long.” This kind of recuperation would be an
ultimate repair: the poet-speaker wants to fix those phantoms—cast them into some stable or
permanent shape, make them whole and coherent again. When the poet repeats this wish in the
following stanza, he appears to synthesize the ideas of “laying in new stores” and “rescuing from
decay the old” with a new hope that he might “endue, might fix in a visible home” his formless
thoughts and feelings.

21

4. “My dear, dear Sister!”: Experience Mediated and Unmediated in “Tintern Abbey”
“Lines written a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey” seems to propose a different way of
being in the world. In this poem, Wordsworth expresses a sense of nostalgia for a freer, wilder
kind of seeing and feeling. The poet-speaker reminds himself that, the first time he toured the
Wye, as a youth,
…nature then
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,
And their glad animal movements all gone by,)
To me was all in all. –I cannot paint
What then I was. The sounding cataract
Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to me
An appetite: a feeling and a love,
That had not need of a remoter charm,
By thought supplied, or any interest
Unborrowed from the eye. –That time is past,
And all its aching joys are now no more,
And all its dizzy raptures. (Major Works 133.73-89)
The speaker can recount those “aching joys” and “dizzy raptures,” but he cannot conjure the
them up again—that first experience is inaccessible to him from the scene of recollection and
composition. In “Tintern Abbey,” the poet-speaker must learn not to mourn the passing of these
vivid, youthful impressions and must discover instead the “abundant recompense” (134.86) of
worshipping nature “with warmer love, oh! with far deeper zeal/Of holier love” (135.155-156).
The poet-speaker affirms that it is only “with an eye made quiet by the power/Of harmony, and
the deep power of joy,/We see into the life of things” (132.47-48).
The poet-speaker insists,
Though absent long, these forms of beauty have not been to me,
As is a landscape to a blind man’s eye:
But oft, in lonely rooms, and mid the din
Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,
In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,

22

Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart,
And passing even into my purer mind
With tranquil restoration… (Major Works 132.24-31)
Nevertheless, this vision of “the life of things” rests uneasily against the energy and wildness of
the poet-speaker’s former pleasures when “nature then…/To me was all in all.” However, its
unrecordable intensity returns, embodied in the figure of his sister, Dorothy. The speaker
exclaims,
…in thy voice I catch
The language of my former heart, and read
My former pleasures in the shooting lights
Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while
May I behold in thee what I was once,
My dear, dear Sister! (134.117-122)

In the same way that, in The Prelude, the process of composition seemed to hinder the poetspeaker’s participation in or access to things in the world, in “Tintern Abbey,” the presence of
Dorothy animates the poet-speaker’s memories of his former impressions of the scene, recalling
an intensity of experience that unsettles the poet’s sense of the “abundant recompense” (134.86)
and “tranquil restoration” (132.31) he has gained through the passage of time and the process of
recollection.
Despite the difficulties he encounters with the process of composition—moving from
experience into language—and the disjunction it seems to expose between experience and
representation, Wordsworth continues to insist upon the power of the poet’s language and the
mechanisms particular to the poet’s sensibility: his extended powers of sympathy and
recollection. Ultimately, as much as Dorothy Wordsworth’s way of seeing is to be privileged as a
way of being in the world, it is excluded from the work of art-making. This scene of unmediated
experience is erased by the process of “recollection”—it remains a prelude to the scene of

23

composition, something that is not included in Wordsworth’s understanding of the process of
writing.

24

CHAPTER TWO

1. Introduction
I have chosen to make the Alfoxden Journal the main focus of my study of Dorothy
Wordsworth for two reasons: First, in comparison with the Grasmere Journal, which spans a
period from May 1800 to Jaunary 1803, the Alfoxden Journal is a briefer document with a more
tightly unified sense of time and place. Second, as I will argue later in this chapter, I find that it
has a discernible arc—a sense of temporal progression that I hesitate to describe as “narrative”
for reasons I will explore later. What we know about the biographical context of the journal adds
credence for my sense of the journal’s unity. Dorothy Wordsworth wrote in the notebook known
as The Alfoxden Journal from January 20, 1798 until May 22 of the same year, a period that
marks a major transitional moment in her life: Having lost their lease at Alfoxten House,
William and Dorothy knew that they would soon have to find another place to leave. Dorothy
would have to prepare herself to leave her first real family home, where she had been able to
establish independent housekeeping and live under the same roof as her brother for the first time
since they had been separated as children, after the death of their parents.
Pamela Woof, editor of the Oxford World’s Classics edition of The Grasmere and
Alfoxden Journals, suggests that the project began as an effort to remember for the briefly absent
Coleridge, observations of the natural landscape that the Wordsworth siblings were making
together on their habitual walks (Woof 3). The journal’s entries, however, extend long past the
period during which Coleridge would have been away. The Alfoxden Journal’s entries are fullest
at the beginning of the document and reach what could be described as a climax at the end of
February. A slackening off begins at the end of March so that, towards the beginning of May,
entries are condensed to only a few sentences. One can only imagine that as spring turned to

25

summer, Dorothy became increasingly busy. The journal ends with a brief account of a journey
undertaken to Cheddar Rock, with Coleridge. What should we make of this gathering of
momentum and slow tapering off? As their departure neared, perhaps the urgency that had
prompted Dorothy to begin writing, in anticipation of all that they would leave behind, began to
fade. In any case, The Alfoxden Journal is notable for the way it delicately sustains itself through
entries that accrue a literary impetus as they slowly build up a sense of place and time passing.

2. “Her taste a perfect electrometer—…”: Approaching Dorothy Wordsworth
In the revised edition of her groundbreaking Dorothy Wordsworth and Romanticism,
Susan Levin reminds readers of the important deficits that still vex scholarship on Dorothy
Wordsworth. Not only does the fact that many of her late journals remain unpublished
“produc[e] a real gap in the effort to provide a fuller account of her work” (Levin 11), as yet
there is no complete scholarly edition of her work. Perhaps, Levin suggests, this is because
her writing is distinct from institutionalized literary categories. Her texts frequently do
not conform to canonical notions of literature, often seeming weirdly idiosyncratic. Yet,
the critical questions her literary output raises can be generalized as issues involving
women’s writing and contemporary literary criticism, issues involving romanticism as a
literary phenomenon, the artistic acceptability of various genres, and the publication and
availability of certain texts. (Levin 4)
Given the idiosyncrasy of much of her work, how do scholars approach Dorothy Wordsworth?
Critics of Dorothy Wordsworth, from Thomas De Quincey to Margaret Homans, tend to
her visionary power, regarding her considerable faculty for observation as though it were an
essential feature of her personality. For example, Rachel Brownstein comments, “The journal
form, unpretentious and dogged, loose but self-limiting, unfinished, with the smell of the private
writing room forever about it, is admirably suited to what Dorothy Wordsworth had to say”
(Brownstein 63). This description of Dorothy Wordsworth’s gift cannot offer us any new

26

understanding of her life and work. It is an explanation that emerges from efforts to inscribe her
into the Romantic tradition but, as we will see, these efforts cannot be realized in a meaningful
way: they role they strive to script for Dorothy alongside accounts of her brother’s work remains
unsatisfactory. Many of these efforts to revisit Dorothy Wordsworth’s life and work with a new
appreciation for its place in the Romantic tradition cast her, with a certain amount of
inevitability, as a figure who tacitly endorses and underscores the Romantic ideology—the
“egotistical sublime”—that is the support of William’s poetics. The only alternative seems to be
to envision Dorothy as a stifled voice making passionate but doomed attempts to bring herself
into dialogue with her brother’s projects, a thwarted effort undermines the Romantic project from
the inside. Evidence for these positions is overwhelmingly mined from her autobiography and
pathography, as if her life itself and her illnesses were their own evidence.
Was Dorothy Wordsworth mad? For many feminist commentators on her life and work,
the story of the mental deterioration she suffered during her final decades of life serves as a
convenient way to reveal the ways in which her subjectivity as woman and writer transcended
her difficult roles as collaborator with William, family caregiver, and household manager. For
these readers, madness represents her rage against the restricted choices her life and times
offered her, becomes a stage the resurgence of repressed feeling, and an explanation for her
failure to fully express the “poetic identity” they find latent in her writings. This madness and her
chronic illnesses, which worsened with age, become shorthand for a narrative about her life in
which, “inasmuch as she wished to translate for her own use the imaginative privileges her
brother took to himself, the effort was doomed” (Alexander 199) and in which “her body takes
over the travail that a text might have lifted into a symbolic telling” (Alexander 206). Within the
frame of this narrative, her writing practices only show up as symptoms, rather than artistic work

27

in their own right, for no division between life and work can be afforded to a person who was not
a poet.
This goes to show that, on the balance, scholarly efforts to include Dorothy Wordsworth
in the Romantic tradition fall back heavily on the very script William Wordsworth constructs in
prose works like the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads: that old story about poetic experiment, in
which the artist must transcend not only his literary antecedents but also the boundaries between
the work of art and life itself—in order to wrest something away from life, rareify it, and deliver
it up once again to the reader, made new.
Consensus emerges from much of the scholarly writing on Dorothy Wordsworth. In
Seduction and Betrayal, Elizabeth Hardwick puts it concisely, writing that she “lacked the
generalizing power” (Hardwick 148). In other words, Dorothy lacked the power to move in the
way William could from her life and into the work of art. What she lacked, precisely, is variously
described as a willingness, a capacity, strength. Whether its roots are determined to be
psychological or circumstantial, the conclusion remains the same: this lack represents her
dependence, her fears, her failure to self-actualize, to assume her poetic identity. For example,
The premise of Margaret Homans’s classic study, Women Writers and Poetic Identity, makes it
clear that these conclusions emerge from the difficulty of trying to make Dorothy Wordsworth’s
life story fit into usual ways of thinking about the work of poetry and the creative development
of the poet, and defining the dividing line between “artist” and “amateur” (Homans 6).
The difficulty of this effort is compounded by an impulse that Elizabeth Hardwick
revealingly describes as “a sort of insatiability [that] seems to infect our feelings when we look
back on women, particularly on those who are highly interesting and yet whose effort at selfdefinition through works is fitful, casual, that of an amateur. We are inclined to think they could

28

have done more, that we can make retroactive demands upon them for a greater degree of
independence and authenticity” (Hardwick 143). This insatiability—that makes scholarship on
Dorothy Wordsworth often as engaging as it is frustrating to work with—seems to be driven by a
hard-to-articulate need to get close to the life of this woman, a desire for intimacy with her, for
some special insight about her thoughts and experience beyond what we can glean from the
writings she left behind and the first-person accounts of her that remain to us. This need for
intimacy is so strong and particular—so excessive—that it seems out of place and slightly
inappropriate for scholarship.
Virginia Woolf and Elizabeth Hardwick, in their essays about Dorothy Wordsworth, both
make strong, imaginative efforts to reanimate the thoughts and feelings of their subject. The
frustration inherent in all these scholarly and critical attempts to approach Dorothy Wordsworth
signals to me that we need to begin to tell a different story about the relationship between art and
life; the life of the artist and the artist’s “gift.” A work like Dorothy Wordsworth’s Alfoxden
Journal makes the firm boundaries between living and writing suddenly porous—puts them
suddenly in question—and exposes the way in which the creation of art is a process that depends
on fortuitous circumstances, unusual and disciplined efforts—in short, on practice.
I want to propose the following: First, it is important that we see Dorothy Wordsworth as
a necessary condition for William Wordsworth’s work—just as William is the necessary
condition for her own work. For William, Dorothy is a material support, but also the person who
makes possible, to a significant extent, the particular atmosphere that arose from the material
conditions of their shared life— their daily routines and rituals, their walks; the gathering of
sticks, the composing of poems. For Dorothy, cohabitation with William made possible the
degree of independence she was able to win for herself, and he was the object of the abundant

29

love and vitality she had to share. Together, they were able to recover the family ties they lost so
early in childhood. Second, I want to make the following argument: In order to formulate an
account of the Romantic tradition that includes the work of Dorothy Wordsworth, we need to
write a new script to describe the relationship between art, life, and work. The challenge of
reading Dorothy Wordsworth does not arise from a need to replace her in a literary canon from
which she has been dropped or left out, but to reformulate our understanding of that canon
altogether. To that end, I want to inscribe the connections I read between William and Dorothy
Wordsworth’s texts within an account of the development of a counter-tradition: that of the
writer’s notebook, or carnet, and the development of understandings of writing as process. In
chapters three and four, I will suggest a revisiting of Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals through the
lens of a “poetics of the notebook.” But first, I want to turn my attention to her writings in the
Alfoxden Journal.

3. The Alfoxden Journal
The importance of home for Dorothy cannot be overstated—she had grown up an orphan,
separated from her older brothers, and cared for until the age of fifteen by her mother’s cousin.
When it became necessary for her to move to her maternal grandparents’ house at Penrith,
leaving her Aunt Threlkeld’s house in Halifax, Yorkshire—the scene of a happy childhood—was
painful. In her adolescence, Dorothy grew into a deep awareness of what she and her brothers
had lost with the death of their parents. In 1787, during her first summer at Penrith, Dorothy was
reunited with them for the first time since their early childhood separation. Their rediscovery of
familial bonds was emotional and made an intense and lasting impression on Dorothy, who
became especially close with William, the next to her in age. Her brothers, home from school,

30

took an interest in her education and offered her books—the Iliad and the Odyssey, works by
Shakespeare, Milton, and Fielding (Woof 132). That same year, Dorothy became friends with the
Hutchinson sisters—also orphaned. Her mother’s youngest brother, William Cookson, an
Anglican graduate of St. John’s College, joined her grandparents’ household and took her under
his wing, tutoring her in French, arithmetic and geography (Woof 133). After her grandfather’s
death that year and William Cookson’s marriage, Dorothy was taken to live with the Cooksons in
their new living at Forncett Rectory, Norfolk. As an unmarried, dependent young relative,
Dorothy took assumed important roles in the life of the growing Cookson family, becoming
“head nurse, housekeeper, tutoress of the little ones or rather superintendent of the nursery” (The
Early Years: Letters qtd. Woof 134). Life with the Cooksons, despite its drudgery, must have
provided scope for DW’s imagination – being part of a young family beginning to establish itself
led her to daydream of building a home of her own: She imagined “a life with her brother in ‘my
little Parsonage’ (EY 88), and, having the ‘Friend of my Childhood’ to ‘spend at least a year with
me’ (EY 91). Roses and honey suckles would spring and a wood behind the house would furnish
‘a winter’s shelter and a summer’s noon-day shade’ (EY 97). The women would sew and
William would read aloud” (Woof 134).
It should be no surprise that Dorothy’s vision of independence doesn’t revolve around
anticipation of her own marriage or children of her own—probably she had seen enough of what
that life was like with the Cooksons. Her vision of family life is very different. It revolves around
sympathy, companionship, and intellectual exchange. True, it is William who reads and the
women who sew—but it is Dorothy’s sensibility that envisions and animates this scene. This
reimagining of the family scene becomes increasingly important to Dorothy as life with the
Cooksons becomes more stifling. Though William had spent six weeks visiting her during her

31

first winter at Forncett, by 1792, William—as the father of a child out of wedlock, and a
republican freshly returned from France, having refused to take orders and with no career
prospects—was no longer welcome (Woof 134). By this time Dorothy had come of age, and
finally decided to orchestrate a break with her relatives at Forncett, contriving to meet William at
their Aunt Threlkeld’s house in Halifax and departing together on a six week walking tour in the
spring of 1794. Dorothy did not return to Forncett that year, and was not to return. By mid-1795,
she and William set up housekeeping at Racedown Lodge in Dorset, and Dorothy agreed to care
for Basil Montagu, the motherless child of one of William’s friends.
The Alfoxden Journal begins during the second half of the Wordsworth’s residence at
Alfoxten House, where they had moved from Racedown, to be closer to Coleridge. Their
unconventional household –their servant, Peggy, their charge, Basil Montagu and guests
including Coleridge and the radical John Thelwall—and unconventional habits created an
atmosphere of mystery and suspicion that evidently made them the targets of local gossip: Were
they “violent democrats” or perhaps French spies? Their landlord refused to extend their oneyear lease (Gittings 70-72).
In the meantime, William and Coleridge made a first attempt at collaboration with “The
Rime of the Ancient Marnier” in 1797. Wordsworth and Coleridge’s collaboration also
represented a joint effort to make money, for, at the end of that year, the Wordsworths found
themselves in financial straits: Basil Montagu, Sr. was unable to compensate Dorothy for her
care of his son Basil, William still had to repay his Aunt Wordsworth for his schooling at
Cambridge, and Coleridge, too, was in debt (Gittings 74).
Dorothy Wordsworth’s 1798 Alfoxden Journal, which runs from January of that year
until May, is a record set against a time of uncertainty and impending upheaval for the

32

Wordsworth household, coupled with the siblings’ growing friendship with Coleridge and the
excitement of William and Coleridge’s collaboration on the poetry that would be collected in
Lyrical Ballads. Perhaps these details explain the sense of compression that crystallizes these
entries: they were written in anticipation of a point of reckoning—under pressure of the need to
make progress on the Lyrical Ballads project, Dorothy and William were also facing the question
of what would be next in their life together. After the end of the period covered by the Alfoxden
Journal, Coleridge convinces the Wordsworths to travel to Germany, where Dorothy and
William spend a miserable winter in Goslar while William composes the Lucy Poems.
The Alfoxden Journal opens at the end of winter in the mild Southwest of England, so
that the whole document is inflected by the change in season as well as this sense of anticipation.
The January thaw is itself an upheaval. In the journal’s first entry, we receive a sweeping view of
a landscape suddenly alive with meltwater that streaks down the ridge, streams that carve out
silver paths; a landscape suddenly relaxed, gathering, clustering, and spreading: “After the wet
dark days, the country seems more populous. It peoples itself in the sunbeams” (Journals 141).
The description here is akin to a landscape sketch, but what is missing is any sense of vantage
point. The ridges are populated with sunbeams, but the subject governing and shaping this
observation is curiously absent.
Where would one have to stand to see the “silver lines of water running between the
ridges” (Journals 141)? Or the place where “the purple-starred hepatica spreads itself in the sun”
(Journals 141)? The observer’s perspective oscillates between the macro- and the microscopic,
taking in at once the countryside suddenly crowded with sunlight and then, with exquisite detail,
clusters of snowdrops, “their white heads, at first upright, ribbed with green, and like a rosebud
when completely opened, hanging their heads downwards, but slowly lengthening their slender

33

stems” (Journals 141). The view is crowned with a vision of the tracery of bare branches on the
crest of the ridge, where “the shafts of the trees show in the light like the columns of a ruin”
(Journals 141). Just as the play of light illuminates these trunks in such a way that we seem
witness to a sort of temporal collapse—where their repeated shapes resemble “the columns of a
ruin”—the attention of the seeing subject who records these observations plays about the whole
scene like something entirely unfixed, unmoored from any single vantage point.
In her edition of Dorothy Wordsworth’s Grasmere and Alfoxden Journals, Pamela Woof
notes that the author of this entry is not known. The passage is in William’s hand, and it is
written as notation—with no date, no capitalizations, and no punctuation besides dashes. Though
it is possible that the entry represents William’s copy of a composition by Dorothy, there is no
evidence that this is the case—no similar example of such a copy exists (Notes to 141, Journals
275).
“The notebooks were used in common,” writes Woof, speculating, “It might have been
W[illiam] who started the Journal, with D[orothy] copying his sentences, and then continuing in
another, now lost, notebook. Or, the brother and sister may have talked the sentences into
existence together with W initially writing them down” (Notes to 141, Journals 275). The page,
however, is certainly a draft, Woof asserts. She describes what it looks like in manuscript: A
draft of “The Discharged Soldier”—also in William’s hand—follows the entry. Also visible in
Dorothy’s hand is the word “amen” inscribed eighteen times—the test of a new pen nib (Notes to
141, Journals 275).
The details of Woof’s description create a sense of the manuscript page as a capsule
representation of the status of Dorothy and William’s shared practices of composition at this
time. Notebooks, pens and papers were used in common. Words themselves, phrases, were used

34

in common; they were traveling in a constant stream between Dorothy and her brother. Even
their vision of the landscape they lived in was shared and multifarious—with the whole
panoramic setting abundantly ratified by their almost prayerful attentiveness to it and to each
other.
The entries that follow are undoubtedly all written in Dorothy Wordsworth’s hand, and
follow each other during the months of January and February with regularity. Her entry for the
23rd of January is another detailed landscape study that mirrors the journal’s first entry, but is
markedly different in style and content. The January 20th entry can be characterized by its
oscillation from the universal to the particular, sketching a view of the landscape from an
impossible perspective that can takes in, at once, the way light falls on trees “upon the highest
ridge of that round hill” (Journals 141) in the distance, and the appearance of small spring
flowers in garden hollows. This entry’s panoramic perspectival shifts are mirrored by rhetorical
leaps in phrases like, “After dark wet days, the country seems more populous. It peoples itself in
sunbeams” (Journals 141). In the January 23rd entry, description is firmly grounded in a
catalogue of physical sensations, recorded with special attention colors, textures, and sounds.
The entry begins, “Bright sunshine, went out at 3 o’clock. The sea perfectly calm blue, streaked
with deeper colour by the clouds, and tongues or points of sand; on our return of a gloomy red.
The sun gone down. The crescent moon, Jupiter and Venus” (Journals 141). It is impossible not
to take note of the visual homologies that link this entry with the two entries that immediately
precede it.
On January 21st, a walk on the hill-tops is notable for views of “the tops of beeches of a
brown-red or crimson, those oaks fanned by the sea breeze thick with feathery sea-green moss,
as a grove not stripped of its leaves. Moss cups more proper than acorns for fairy goblets”

35

(Journals 141). On January 22nd, ivy is seen “twisting round the oaks like bristled serpents” and
holly bushes, “capriciously bearing berries” offer the walkers shelter from the cold (Journals
141). Dorothy Wordsworth marks the slow progress of the new season by the redness rising into
the tips of branches, the way bright red berries stand out in a mostly colorless landscape, and the
sea breeze fans sea-green moss. On January 23rd, the sea itself is streaked with crimson tongues
of sand tinted “gloomy red” by the setting sun. Time passes in this entry. Changing light alters
the landscape, but in this description, what is seen is never allowed to become like anything it is
not, in the way “shafts of trees show in the light like the columns of a ruin” in the January 20th’s
entry.
The opening sentences of this entry contain no personal pronouns. Pamela Woof notes,
“D, when she and W were joint subjects, frequently omitted personal pronouns before verbs of
action such as ‘walked,’ ‘set out,’ ‘set forward;’ if individual subjects were needed she made it
clear…” (Notes to 142, Journals 267). In the Alfoxden Journal’s first entry, the absence of
personal pronouns could possibly be attributed to the collaboration that originated it. Certainly, a
spirit of collaboration informs the composition of the journal throughout and in a way the
document is a palimpsest of observations shared, impressions noted in common. Other readers
have interpreted Dorothy Wordsworth’s sparse use of the first-person pronoun as a mark of
extreme reticence. Susan Levin suggests,
One possible explanation of this trait is that Dorothy’s ‘I’ is so tenuous is that she
cannot assert it as she writes. That possibility also contains its opposite: the writing of ‘I’
must displace the presence of the writer as it substitutes itself for it, thus making the form
of Dorothy’s sentences indicate a kind of negative assertion through her refusal to
displace by signing. (Levin 18)
Levin appears to conclude that Dorothy Wordsworth’s reticence might contain a quiet selfassertion—the “tenuousness” of her “I” contains an unobtrusive power. Perhaps we could

36

strengthen that reading: I think that Dorothy Wordsworth’s missing “I,” and frequently elided
personal pronouns, are less a mark of her hesitation to cast herself as the subject of her writings
than a strategic choice, related to the constraints of notation, and opening up a number of
rhetorical possibilities.
Halfway through the entry, Dorothy Wordsworth invokes a “we.” This joint pronoun
serves as anchorage that was missing in the earlier entry, bringing that free-floating perspective
down to a point, and giving January 23rd’s entry a center of gravity even as it avoids fixing the
vantage point absolutely in one place. She writes,
The sound of the sea distinctly heard on the tops of the hills, which we could never hear
in summer. We attribute this partly to the bareness of the trees, but chiefly to the absence
of the singing of birds, the hum of insects, that noiseless noise which lives in the summer
air. The villages marked out by beautiful beds of smoke. The turf fading into the
mountain road. The scarlet flowers of the moss. (Journals 141-142)
The latter half of the entry is framed by a perspective that is refracted, distributed among
multiple subjects. The observation recorded here seems to have been made in concert or to have
arisen from consensus.
Even as point of view becomes confusingly prismatic, the phrase “we attribute” lends a
sense of objectivity, of rigor, to the words that follow. At the same time, the final phrase in this
entry, that note about “scarlet flowers of the moss,” is a forceful reminder of the governing
consciousness that frames all of these observations—Dorothy Wordsworth’s. It harkens back to
the two entries that link this one with the journal’s first and record those hints of color appearing
in the early spring landscape: sap rising in the reddening tops of beeches, sea-green moss
hanging from the limbs of oaks, moss cups, bright red holly berries, and the moss’s scarlet
flowers—a play of contrasts that begins the slow accumulation of a pattern.

37

The strength of the visual imagery across all these entries is very striking. Dorothy
Wordsworth records her observations of landscape with such sensual fullness that when we read
her journals, we want to linger on them, to realize her descriptions, to try with all our might to
see the way she sees. This undeniable attraction accounts, at least partly, for the way many
readers emphasize Dorothy Wordsworth’s essential “gift,” the acuity of her vision, at the
expense of a full appreciation of the strength of her voice. This tendency makes it difficult for us
to understand Dorothy Wordsworth as a writer engaged in an artistic project, to view her journals
authentically as “works” that can be read in a truly dynamic relationship with the her life and as
other than that life’s essential product or symptom.
Thus, Susan Levin describes the intensity of Dorothy Wordsworth’s responses to her
surroundings as a tendency towards “reality testing”—an infantile strategy of defining her own
subjectivity in relation to “resistant objects that help her comprehend her own separateness from
the external world” (Levin 16)—as a way of keeping nature present before her at all times.
Levin’s reading limits our understanding of Dorothy Wordsworth’s “gift” as a faculty for
observation that can only linger on the surfaces of the things she sees, and her writing process as
a naïve practice that operates with transparency. Levin’s reading exposes some of the reasons we
lose track of the strength and persistence of Dorothy Wordsworth’s writing voice.
Another reason that voice escapes us is her skill in concealing it. The subjectivity that
frames Dorothy Wordsworth’s journal entries melts into the natural scenes she describes,
blurring boundaries between the writing process and the very passing of days. The occasion of
recording something in a journal creates an opportunity to elide the moment of observation and
the moment of composition. Of course, we can never hope to reconstruct that process, to render
Dorothy Wordsworth’s intentions visible or to disentangle practiced effort the habit or ritual of

38

journal-keeping, but I think it is important that we begin to approach these journals with more
attentiveness to the places where her compositional strategies expose themselves.
Our sense of Dorothy Wordsworth’s voice should be strengthened by distinctions she
begins to draw as the journal progresses. Certain days and evenings are logged as “uninteresting”
or “interesting.” It would be wrong to infer that nothing happens on those “uninteresting” days,
or that the entries that describe them are not noteworthy. Rather, these adjectives offer explicit
insight into Dorothy Wordsworth’s developing practice of composition. As Pamela Woof notes,
“D’s ‘uninteresting’ and ‘interesting’ have their own interest. For her, an ‘interesting’ evening is
one where something dramatic happens in nature, usually in the sky” (Notes to 142, Journals
279). Dorothy Wordsworth’s “interesting” and “uninteresting” signal the ways in which the
journal is acquiring the dimensions of a project in its own right: beginning to take on interests of
its own, beginning to demand certain kinds of accounts.
For example, the entry for January 27th is a record of what was “upon the whole an
uninteresting evening” (Journals 142). Nevertheless, a lengthy and meticulous description of
scenery viewed on an evening walk follows:
Only once while we were in the wood the moon burst through the invisible veil which
enveloped her, the shadows of the oaks blackened, and their lines became more strongly
marked. The withered leaves were coloured with a deeper yellow, a brighter gloss spotted
the hollies; again her form became dimmer; the sky flat, unmarked by distances, a white
thin cloud. (Journals 142)
On this cloud-muffled evening, the moon’s sudden illumination of oak-trees and holly bushes is
striking—an instant that becomes an event in and of itself. The adjective “uninteresting” frames
the whole scene, strengthening and underlining the play of contrasts that is recorded here.
Shadows blacken, shapes become “more strongly marked,” colors deepen, and the hollies take on

39

“a brighter gloss” before the rays of moonlight subsides, with a flattening effect on the whole
landscape, which becomes ordinary once again.
Suddenly the “uninteresting” takes on a great deal of importance. The choices Dorothy
Wordsworth makes early in the Alfoxden Journal mutually reinforce each other, gathering
authority and strengthening the presence of a voice in this text in a way that should unsettle those
readings that conceive of her writing process as transparent observations simply taken from life.
However, as we become witnesses to the play of Dorothy’s discriminating sensibility she draws
distinctions between material that is “interesting” and “uninteresting, we should appreciate these
distinctions as an insight into the ways in which her journal—a record so tightly interwoven with
daily life—becomes a project that begins to peel itself away from the “uninteresting” succession
of everyday life.
What Dorothy chooses to leave out of this document is just as important as the afternoon
walks, the seascapes, and the moonrises she leaves in, for we must recall that the Wordsworths’
life was as structured by the banal routines of domestic work as it was by its ecstatic
interruptions: the long walks, the visits from Coleridge, the composition of poetry. While
Wordsworth’s poetics create a dichotomy between ordinary (domestic) work and the poet’s
abstracted, intellectual labor to transform the “language really used by men” who “hourly
communicate with the best objects from which the best part of language is derived” (“Preface” to
Lyrical Ballads 597) into poetry, “whereby ordinary things should be presented to the mind in an
unusual way’ (“Preface” 597). Crucially, Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals replace those poetics
in a domestic context, restoring or revealing their real connection with life in a way that belies
the very claim to transcendence such a poetics insists upon.

40

I hesitate here to set up an equation between Dorothy’s daily collection of eggs and sticks
for the household and her daily collection of images for William—to suggest her as a real-life
figure for William’s rustics would be reductive. An effort to examine the role that domestic work
actually plays in the Alfoxden Journal is much more promising. It must be acknowledged that
her work—managing the household, and caring for three year old Basil Montagu—does not take
up much space in the journal, whose entries revolve around walks taken, natural scenery viewed,
and interactions between land, sea, and sky. The most visible domestic task in this journal is the
gathering of sticks—perhaps because this chore consistently takes Dorothy and William out of
the house and into the woods together. In the journal, this chore becomes a sort of ritual, built
into Dorothy and William’s shared practices of observation and composition.
The work described in this journal does seem relatively lightweight and incidental—but it
is not altogether elided and does not disappear. On the contrary it becomes a kind of structuring
principle: days are distinguished by their attendant tasks. They go to the woods to gather sticks,
Dorothy walks to Coombe to buy eggs, they pass the baker’s or the blacksmith’s. Work is woven
into the domestic routine: the interesting parts of the day are those that take Dorothy outside, but
the best parts of all are the long walks that take her, with William and Coleridge, outside of the
space of domesticity altogether and into the natural world. These walks are periods of leisure,
which turn into occasions for the composition of poems and those efforts of observation that
make their way into Dorothy’s journal.
The Wordsworths go for walks nearly every day, but certain excursions are like holidays
– for Dorothy, they represent signal moments. (Moreover, at its beginning, her housekeeping
with William must have felt like a permanent holiday – she had won her independence from her
relatives, and now the work she did to manage the household was for herself, her own family,

41

and no longer she owed charitable relatives on whom she was dependent.) The entry Dorothy
records for February 26 describes one such holiday. Coleridge has come to visit, and the trio sets
off on a walk in the direction of Stowey:
A very clear afternoon. We lay sidelong upon the turf, and gazed on the landscape till it
melted into more than natural loveliness. The sea very uniform, of a pale grayish blue,
only one distant vessel sailing up it, a perfect image of delight. Walked to the top of a
high hill to see a fortification. Again sat down to feed upon the prospect; a magnificent
scene, curiously spread out for even minute inspection, though so extensive that the mind
is afraid to calculate its bounds. A winter prospect shows every cottage, every farm, and
the forms of distant tress such as in summer have no distinguishing mark. On our return,
Jupiter and Venus before us. While the twilight still overpowered the light of the moon,
we were reminded that she was shining bright above our heads, by our faint shadows
before us. We had seen her on the tops of the trees, melting into the blue sky.
Dorothy’s writing depicts a scene suffused with pleasure: a landscape that “melt[s]” with unusual
loveliness, a solitary ship on a calm sea seems “a perfect image of delight.” Many of the
elements that appear again and again in other entries in the Alfoxden Journal come together in
this one: the landscape that unites sea and sky, and a winter prospect that lends the scene unusual
clarity. Dorothy’s description of sitting down a second time “to feed upon the prospect” lends a
more explicit sense of her individual presence than any other moment in this brief entry. In
describing a scene “curiously spread out for even minute inspection, though so extensive that the
mind is afraid to calculate its bounds,” she situates in relation to it with more physical detail than
we often receive. At the same time, the perspective she is describing remains unstable, even
vertiginous, at once minute and boundless.
I think there are grounds to suggest that, having begun to collect certain impressions,
certain questions, landscapes, seas and skies, there is a way in which Dorothy Wordsworth
composes her days around what will add to and extend the life of her project. Out of these efforts
comes a practice of composition that exceeds the documentary and, bleeding into habits of
knowing and noticing, begins to transform it. Earlier, I was trying to suggest ways that we can

42

observe how the journal begins to transform itself into a project, gathering momentum that is
quite different from the forward motion of a narrative but nevertheless begins to insist upon
certain patterns—a growing document that becomes in and of itself an occasion for certain kinds
of reflections, certain impressions. Susan Levin writes,
The personal journals are narratives and rejections of narrative, a perpetual unfolding, a
seemingly formless sequence of words that nonetheless suggests structure and closure.
The journals are not a simple series of happenings; events are emplotted and through
sequence make various statements about the emotional life of the narrator. At the same
time, however, as the journals contain the open-endedness of the form (journals as dayby-day, indefinitely continuous account), they also each seem to tell a story that can be
read as an enclosed narrative… (Levin 9)

This comment remarks on the feature of the Alfoxden Journal I have been working hard to show
in this reading: it literariness, it’s constructedness. But how best to describe this quality? The
Alfoxden Journal is a document from which we strongly receive the impression that we are
witnessing the emergence of a structure: a kind of clustering, a gathering together of fragments.
The journal is a structure in process: something growing, perhaps, then slowly falling away. All
the constituent elements of the Alfoxden Journal come together briefly, and are held in tension—
then the tension falls away. In this chapter, I have struggled to describe a form that is not yet
articulated as a form; a form that brings itself into visibility before receding.

43

CHAPTER THREE

1. Scenes of Composition
As the first entry in the Alfoxden Journal, with its uncertain authorship, suggests, the daily
routines of walking outdoors, observing the natural world, and composing poetry pervaded the
Wordsworths’ everyday life to the extent that these activities—like the daily labor of
housekeeping—are, at first glance, invisible. However, as I have remarked, the sharing of
observations and the process of composition are emblematized by the rhetorical strategies
Dorothy Wordsworth uses in her journal: for example, the framing device of a plural
subjectivity, the ways in which scenes of observation and scenes of writing are always elided,
and the choices she makes to frame own voice or point of view by indirect assertion. That
entry—along with Pamela Woof’s excellent textual notes concerning the manuscript, in
William’s hand and with Dorothy’s marginal notes and doodles—offers us the opportunity to
make some conjectures about the nature of the Wordsworths’ shared process of composition,
revealing that the notebook was or at least started out as a common space for writing—that the
writing in it was not at all private. But how much might Dorothy have contributed to the contents
of that entry recorded in William’s hand? To what extent did that entry serve as a model for
those that followed? The manuscript alone cannot provide the answers to these questions.
In the Grasmere Journal, William and Dorothy’s “collaboration” takes central stage. The
writing of the journal is motivated by William’s departure and structured around his absence,
which seems to persist, oddly, long after his return. The journal is addressed to him: Dorothy
writes, “I resolved to write a journal of the time till W & J[ohn Wordsworth] return, & I set

44

about keeping my resolve because I will not quarrel with myself, & because I shall give Wm
pleasure by it when he comes home again” (Journals 1).
No sooner has William and John’s departure been recorded on May 14th than Dorothy
laments, at the close of that very first entry, “Oh! that I had a letter from William!” (Journals 2).
William’s return occasions two days of anticipation: First, on June 6th he does not come, and
Dorothy writes, “No William! I slackened my pace as I came home fearing to hear that he was
not come. I listened till after one o’clock to every barking dog, Cock fighting, & other sports…”
(Journals 8). At last, on June 7th, “sitting at work till after 11 o’clock I heard a foot go to the
front of the house, turn round, & open the gate. It was William— —” (Journals 8). The moment
is marked by a dash, a lapse rather than an exclamation. William’s return is a time of renewed
activity: the three siblings plant peas together, run errands, and set off on walks. John fishes,
William prunes cherry trees, and Dorothy bakes pies and tarts—whole days are spent sitting and
working outside. On August 31st, Dorothy recounts, “All the morning I was busy copying
poems—gathered peas, & in the afternoon Coleridge came very hot, her brought the 2nd volume
of the Anthology…” (Journals 15), as if there were an equivalence between the busyness of
gathering peas and copying out poetry.
In the first summer months of the Grasmere Journal, we read entries that recount, “Wm &
I walked along the Cockermouth road—he was altering his poems” (Journals 17), “John & I left
Wm to compose an Inscription—that about the path” (Journals 18), or “William writing his
preface did not walk” (Journals 22). Later, after the end of John’s visit, there’s a change in the
contents of entries like these—marked by a lapse in regularity between mid-September and the
beginning of October. “Here I have long neglected my Journal,” DW writes (Journals 22). Endof-summer guests descend on the Wordsworths, and John departs at the end of September. On

45

their own once again. the siblings seem to start to work together more closey—or, rather, the
progress of William’s writing assumes a place of central importance in DW’s journal. William
no longer secludes himself to write: Now, Dorothy writes, “Wm & I were employed all morning
in writing an addition to the preface. Wm. went to bed very ill after working after dinner…”
(Journals 24). During this intensive period of writing, DW is busy collecting the poems that will
be included in Lyrical Ballads, producing fair copies and discussing editorial decisions with
William. For instance, she writes, “After tea read The Pedlar. Determined not to print Christabel
with the L.B.” (Journals 24).
However, despite the wealth of information the Grasmere Journal offers us about the
material progress of this work, we are left with the feeling that something is missing—real
insight into the dynamic of Dorothy’s participation in her brother’s project. What kind of
discussion followed that reading of “The Pedlar”? What kinds of revisions might Dorothy have
suggested during the process of writing out so many fair copies of William’s poems? How was
the decision to cut Coleridge’s “Christabel” made? Of course, in many cases, it is possible to use
the Grasmere and Alfoxden Journals to trace the cross-pollination of imagery and even turns of
phrase from Dorothy’s repository of observations from nature to William and Coleridge’s poetry,
as Pamela Woof does in the article, “The Uses of Notebooks” (Woof 6).That research still leaves
us wondering about impact of Dorothy’s contributions to William’s writing process and the
dynamic of their partnership, and raises questions about the extent to which we can name that
partnership a collaboration. The nearest we seem to be able to get to the interior of their working
relationship is Dorothy Wordsworth’s record of her work and William’s exertions, which are
often followed by periods of weakness or illness. The scene of composition itself still seems
elusive.

46

In an effort to get at the give-and-take at the center of Dorothy and William’s working
relationship, I want to look at a particular moment in the Grasmere Journal that seems to
encapsulate the interaction between Dorothy’s notekeeping and William’s process of
composition. On April 29, 1802, the siblings sit in John’s Grove, a stand of trees they have
named after their brother, a sea captain, who has by now departed after his long visit in 1800,
the year Dorothy began the journal. Dorothy writes,
Afterwards William lay, & I lay, in the trench under the fence—he with his eyes shut &
listening to the waterfalls and the Birds. There was no one waterfall above another—it
was the sound of waters in the air—the voice of the air. William heard me breathing &
rustling now and then but we both lay still, & unseen by one another—he thought it
would be as sweet thus to lie so in the grave, to hear the peaceful sounds of the earth and
just to know that ones dear friends were near. (Journals 92)
This is a moment characterized by repose and intimacy—lying in silence, each of the siblings
assures the other of their unseen presence as they listen to each other’s breathing and rustling.
The whole scene is encircled by the sound of birds and the waterfalls—“the sound of waters in
the air—the voice of the air”—and is fostered and contained by this uninterrupted wash of sound,
the rush of water and the rising and falling of breath. By recording this brief scene in her journal,
Dorothy memorializes it: In the midst of the entries that precede and succeed it, it stands out like
a signal instant—and for Dorothy, perhaps it felt like one. To her reader, this moment of repose
seems to epitomize the closeness of her relationship with William. That this entry also
documents, as its centerpiece, William’s thought that “it would be as sweet thus to lie so in the
grave, to hear the peaceful sounds of the earth and just to know that ones dear friends were near,”
adds another layer to its significance.
William’s comment on the scene Dorothy documents in her journal transforms the day,
the view, and the very “voice of the air” into its own epitaph. In a way that mimics the formal
structure of an epitaph that entreats “Stop, traveler!” William himself puts on the mask of the

47

dead speaker such an epitaph personifies and, in doing so, fulfills one of our most fervent
fantasies: The hope of the living that the dead remember us, that our longing for them is matched
by their own wish to know that dear friends are near. Thus, the siblings apostrophize themselves,
forecasting the time of their death as a moment of perfect intimacy and peace.
This (morbid) fantasy anticipates an idea that will, in coming years, become one of
William’s preoccupations. In 1810, five years after John Wordsworth’s untimely death in a
shipwreck, William Wordsworth writes Essays upon Epitaphs, a three-part work that appeared in
The Friend. In Essays upon Epitaphs, Wordsworth revisits the concerns he began to explore in
his first major comment on poetics in the 1802 “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads—a document that
must have been freshly in his mind on that April afternoon Dorothy describes in the Grasmere
Journal. The continuities between these three texts—the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, Dorothys
April 1802 journal entry, and Essays upon Epitaphs—suggest ways in which we may bgin to
conceive of making a place for Dorothy Wordsworth’s writing within William’s poetic vision of
the process of composition. It is also a moment that creates an opportunity for re-evaluating
exactly what the stakes of such a vision are.
In the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, William Wordsworth was at pains to describe how
the authenticity of the poet’s address to the reader can be guaranteed by a lectoral pact, by
insistsing on the expansiveness of the poet’s subjectivity and his ability to communicate this to
his reader in a newly renovated language—the language “really used by men” (Major Works
597). But can the promise of such a connection or linkage between the poet’s experience and the
language “really used by men” be borne out? In The Prelude and “Lines Written a few Miles
Above Tintern Abbey,” Wordsworth runs into the difficulties such a claim presents. Essays upon

48

Epitaphs, he returns to this problem of the poem’s inadequacy as a guarantee in and of itself of
the poet’s authenticity with renewed urgency.
As Paul de Man notes in “Autobiography as De-Facement,” Essays upon Epitaphs is a
text that “constructs a sequence of mediations between incompatibles: city and nature, pagan and
Christian, particularity and generality, body and grave, which are brought together under the
general principle according to which ‘origin and tendency are inseparably co-relative’” (de Man
925). Throughout the Essay, Wordsworth strives to establish relationships between such
contradictory and apparently mutually exclusive categories. Just as “origin and tendency are
inseparably co-relative” (Prose Works 51.66-67), so, he insists, are the human desires to preserve
the dead beloved’s body from corruption and his memory from oblivion linked together by
“another and a finer connection than that of contrast. –It is a connection formed through the
subtle process by which, in the natural and the moral world, qualities pass insensibly into their
contraries, and things revolve upon each other” (Prose Works 53.133-138)
What seems to animate that “subtle process” is the forefeeling of immortality, intimated
by love and human reason alike. Would we desire to live in the remembrance of our fellow men,
Wordsworth asks, if we could not conceive of a life after death? We would not, he writes:
Add to the principle of love which exists in the inferior animals, the faculty of reason
which exists in Man alone; will the conjunction of these account for the desire? Doubtless
it is a necessary consequence of this conjunction; yet I do not think as a direct result, but
only to be come at through an intermediate thought, viz. that of an intimation or
assurance within us, that some part of our nature is imperishable. (Prose Works 50.27-41)
The intimation of immortality is an “intermediate” thought—an idea whose presence remains
unaccounted for but is, for Wordsworth, necessary for knitting together the workings of love and
reason. The epitaph itself is an intermediary between pairs of contraries. As Wordsworth is quite
aware, the epitaph may be the most hackneyed, formulaic expression of poetic sentiment

49

imaginable: anyone wandering through a country churchyard may be tempted , he acknowledges,
to wonder irreverently, “Where are all the bad People buried?” (Prose Works 63.15).
Nevertheless, Wordsworth writes, “An experienced and well-regulated mind will not, therefore,
be insensible to this monotonous language of sorrow and affectionate admiration, but will find
under that veil a substance of individual truth” (Prose Works 66.125). As for the contents of the
epitaph, Wordsworth proclaims, “The affections are their own justification” (Prose Works
57.292).
Despite its prosaic characteristics, the epitaph, for Wordsworth, takes on the dimensions
of an exemplary poetic form. He writes,
The composition and quality of the mind of a virtuous man, contemplated by the side of
the grave where his body is mouldering, ought to appear, and be felt as something
midway between what he was on earth walking about with his frailties, and what he may
be presumed to be as a Spirit in heaven. (Prose Works 58.362-367)
The epitaph stands on a midway point between reality and memory, expressing “truth hallowed
by love—the joint offspring of the worth of the dead and the affections of the living!” (Prose
Works 58.346-347). This truth represents what Wordsworth reads as the very real trace of its
author’s sincere love and sorrow for the deceased. Furthermore, the epitaph is composed on an
occasion unlike any other, which
is a matter of fact in its intensity, and forbids more authoritatively than any other species
of composition all modes of fiction, except those which the very strength of passion has
created; which have been acknowledged by the human heart, and have become so
familiar that they are converted into substantial realities. (Prose Works 76.285)
In the epitaph, Wordsworth also describes a form that seems to make possible a shift of the
burden of “proof” that guarantees the authenticity of the poet’s subjectivity away from the poet
and onto the reader. For Wordsworth, this shift depends on an imperative to read epitaphs in a
spirit of generosity and attentiveness to the sincere feelings of their grieving authors, akin to the

50

generosity with which we remember the dead and absent, bringing our feelings close to the
midway point between truth and memory. This convergence of exemplary form and exemplary
occasion seem to suggest to Wordsworth an instance in which language might almost materialize
the emotion it expresses. The epitaph monumentalizes a link between language and experience;
truth and memory; life and death.

2. Wordsworth’s Poetics of Continuity
Wordsworth’s poetics are centrally concerned with establishing a sense of continuity
between the scene of experience and the scene of composition. He is attempting at all times to
resolve the kinds of problems that emerge from the claims he makes in the “Preface" to Lyrical
Ballads. In Essays upon Epitaphs, Wordsworth insists on continuities between contradictory or
apparently disparate concepts by asserting with a sense of urgency that such terms are linked by
“another and a finer connection than that of contrast…a connection formed through the subtle
process by which, in both the natural and the moral world, qualities pass insensibly into their
contraries and things revolve upon each other” (Prose Works 53.13-135). If we cannot depend
upon the workings of that “subtle process” to mediate contrasts—most crucially of all, the
contrast between life and death—Wordsworth admits,
I must confess, with me the conviction is absolute, that, if the impression and sense of
death were not thus counterbalanced, such a hollowness would pervade the whole system
of things, such a want of correspondence and consistency, a disproportion so astounding
betwixt means and ends, that there could be no repose, no joy. (Prose Works 51.8052.100)
As we have seen in the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth’s poetics is centrally
concerned with language’s failure to signify experience in its fullness and totality, without
leaving something out. His own poems tend to run up against language as a barrier—though it

51

appears to offer “abundant recompense,” in moving from silence to speech, language never
seems to compensate satisfactorily for the loss the perfect wholeness, repose, accessible only
before entering into speech. But there must be something more interesting going on in
Wordsworth’s poetry than a persistent failure to signify.
We can see in Essays upon Epitaphs, more clearly and more pressingly than anywhere
else, precisely how troubling and even threatening the discontinuity between experience and its
representation in language is for Wordsworth. So, perhaps we can re-frame the central concern of
Wordsworth’s project as an attempt to establish a sense of continuity between the scene of
experience and the scene of composition. What’s at stake in Wordsworth’s poetry is an
insistence on the integrity of a connection or linkage between these two disparate states of being
that can never be borne out in a clear and straightforward way.
He can only insist that these contraries are linked in a “subtle process”—just as he can
only insist that sincerity is a poetic criterion that can be communicated somehow in excess of
language. Only if we can read the workings of that “subtle process” in the natural and moral
words—only if we can apprehend this crucial meaning-making that seems to take place outside
of or in excess of signification of language, can we be assured that the “whole system of things”
will be saved from “hollowness.” Thus, we might conclude that Wordsworth’s poems aspire to
the condition of epitaphs.
It should be no surprise then that Wordsworth ultimately chooses to privilege the “form”
of the epitaph—as a midway point between life and death—as the vehicle for establishing the
most essential point of continuity. To somehow repair the gap between life and death would
seem to do away with the problem of discontinuity forever. There is nevertheless something
troubling about the thought than any poem aspiring to the condition of the epitaph is in a sense

52

doomed by all the limitations of that form, described so clearly by Wordsworth himself: such
works will always be lapidary, fragmented, partial. The continuity that emerges out of such
fragments must then be built across the only link really left—since we cannot, finally, merge the
disjunction between the living and the dead, even in language. The vehicle for this continuity
becomes the persistence and durability of the poet’s own subjectivity—in other words, the most
important connection for the poet to sustain is the connection between himself and his reader.
If we have become suspicious of Wordsworth’s insistence on the authenticity—the
sufficiency—of his own subjectivity at this point (after readings of the “Preface” and the
Prelude), it’s not without good reason. All of Wordsworth’s efforts of self-expression have a
tentative quality and are fraught with difficulties. They are prefatory efforts in the true sense of
the word. In The Prelude, as in “Tintern Abbey,” self-expression comes at a high price—the
tearing of the self away from the plenitude of wordless communion with the world. Though it
seems almost ridiculous to suggest this of the canonical figure of the “egotistical sublime,”
William Wordsworth’s “I” is much more uncertainly founded, much more reticent—and, in fact,
much more like Dorothy Wordsworth’s than we could appreciate before.

3. Poetics of Discontinuity, or Toward a Poetics of the Notebook
Writing in a notebook is a discipline, a practice in sustaining a particular kind of
attention, but it is a practice that has to be taken up again and again, because it is always being
interrupted. While the notebook would seem to epitomize a poetics of discontinuity at odds with
the continuity the epitaph as form seeks to establish, points of connection between the two forms
abound. Both serve a memorializing function: the notebook is a testament to the passing of time,
capturing the accumulation of small memorials to the ephemerality of the present moment. In

53

particular, the journal takes on a memorializing function insofar as we treat it as a representative
of the empirical subject who kept the record. We call upon a journal to represent its writer just as
we call upon the epitaph to represent the dead person whose grave it marks. In each case, the
occasion for writing authenticates the text itself, bringing it closer to “real life”—the real feeling
of the passage of time, the real exigencies of intense emotion. Like the epitaph, the notebook
makes pressing claims on its reader to participate in a process of re-establishing a sense of
continuity between its fragmentary entries.
However, if we revisit the “epitaphic” scene chronicled in Dorothy Wordsworth’s
Grasmere Journal, we can see that the note-as-form is characterized by a sensibility very
different from the epitaph. This brief entry reveals its distinctness from the poetics of continuity
that govern William Wordsworth’s vision of the process of writing, and, I believe, should win for
the Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals the status of literary works in their own right, texts that
advance claims of their own and do more than serve as a repository of material for William’s
poetic projects.
The scene is knitted together by “the sound of waters in the air—the voice of the air”
(Journals 92). That equivocal description recalls a phrase from the Alfoxden Journal—“the
noiseless noise that lives in the summer air” (Journals 142). It indicates a tenuous space,
something suspended:
William heard me breathing & rustling now and then but we both lay still, & unseen by
one another—he thought it would be as sweet thus to lie so in the grave, to hear the
peaceful sounds of the earth and just to know that ones dear friends were near. (Journals
92)
What is fascinating about this passage is the way Dorothy frames her subjectivity in relation to
her brother’s: His eyes are closed, and her presence only registers at first as the disembodied
breathing and rustling that William hears. Though at first glance this passage seems most marked

54

by Dorothy’s own absence from it, her presence is, properly speaking, all body here, breath and
movement. Not only is her physical presence as all-encompassing as “the sound of waters in the
air—the voice of the air,” Dorothy is the one who keeps her eyes open: recording, documenting,
and staging William’s morbid flight of fancy. This entry contains no reported dialogue, but reads
instead almost like free indirect narration: We are told that William, “with his eyes shut &
listening,” thinks how sweet it would be “thus to lie so in the grave” (Journals 92). The way in
which Dorothy has staged this moment gives us the impression that she inhabits her brother’s
subjectivity as if it were their subjectivity, one and the same—the nested subjectivity of two
presences cradling one another. Thus, we receive an account of the way William’s fancy
becomes her vision; the way that his subjectivity becomes merged with her own.
In this chapter, I explored William Wordsworth’s Essays upon Epitaphs for the
possibility his thoughts seemed to offer of closure for this project, their suggestion of a narrative
that could circle back to Dorothy Wordsworth, re-inscribing her writing practice the arc of the
development of William’s thinking about the process of writing over the course of his writing
life. In returning here to the notion of the journal, or the notebook-as-form, I am hoping to
orchestrate a shift of focus, and introduce a new metaphor, moving from the lapidary character of
the epitaph to the ephemerality of the note-grain, the note-as-seed (Lüthi 254). In a dissertation
that focuses on the work of French poets Georges Perros and Philippe Jaccottet, to offer two
case-studies in the practice and poetics of the note-as-form, Ariane Lüthi writes,
Qui envisage la graine pour interroger une forme d’écriture, s’intéresse davantage au
processus qu’au produit: c’est l’acte, l’ouverture et le jeu des possibilités qui l’emportent,
au détriment de la clôture, du produit fini. […] L’image de la note-graine renvoie à la
poiesis, toutefois, cette pensée concerne moins la production de la note poétique que la
production absolue. (Lüthi 253-254)3
My translation: “One who envisions the seed in an effort to interrogate a form of writing must be
interested in process at the expense of the product, interested in the act itself, in the opening up and play
of possibilities; to the detriment of closure and the finished product. […] The image of the note-as-seed
3

55

By contrast, the dedication of an epitaph is the least open-ended of gestures: monumental and
literally set in stone. The epitaph’s function, and the occasion for its composition, as Wordsworth
so persuasively argues in Essays upon Epitaphs, lends its contents the permanence and gravitas
that an utterance—even a tragic outcry—would lack.
Just as Wordsworth’s Essays upon Epitaphs ultimately, circularly, exposes its own limits
rather than new points of departure, a critical narrative that only seeks to re-inscribe Dorothy
Wordsworth’s own practices within the arc of her brother’s creative development will only leads
us back to where we started. For this reason, I see it as imperative to explore an alternative
possibility: the project of reading Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals through the lens of a poetics of
the notebook—and, with a new understanding of the uncertain, often prefatory status of many of
William Wordsworth’s canonical works, extending this project to a re-evaluation of the
relationships his work establishes between poet and reader, and the registers of the lyrical and the
autobiographical.

always returns us to poiesis, a notion which has less to do with question of the poetic note’s production
than it has to do with the question of production itself.” (Lüthi 253-254)

56

CHAPTER FOUR

1. The Notebook and its Pretexts
Here, I want to propose a turn to the notion of a poetics of the notebook, with the hope of
suggesting new ways in which it may be possible to talk about those categories. The notebook
represents a process of movement between theory and practice, and is a document that lays bare
the ways in which that movement works in both directions. The notebook has a built-in anchor to
the everyday and offers us a way of envisioning, through the slow progress of accumulation, the
growth and development of particular projects, whether or not they become finished “works.”
The notebook is itself a space in which the “work” of writing takes place.
The first section of this chapter reviews the critical and scholarly conversation already
taking place about the notebook. The second part engages with the writing of Philippe Jaccottet,
whose writing practice involves an integrative effort to mediate the poem and its “pretext.”
Jaccottet’s work speaks to both parts of the concerns I’m engaging through the lives and work of
the Wordsworth siblings: the practice of the poet and the practice of the note-taker. In La
Semaison, he asks, “But how do you proceed from a number of ‘notes toward a poem’ to the
poem itself?” This question, as an extension of the problems that preoccupy both Dorothy and
William Wordsworth, amplifies the complexities inherent in the lyric tradition.

2. Object and territory: Notebooks and their Readers
A “poetics of the notebook” offers a new framework for understanding the status of
Dorothy Wordsworth’s work in relation to her brother’s, just as it suggests alternative ways of
thinking about points of contact between the lyrical and autobiographical registers. In order to

57

explore how a poetics of the notebook might accomplish this, the following questions need to be
posed: What hopes and pretensions are at stake in a poetics of the notebook? And what are the
characteristics of the note-as-form—or the notebook as genre? Ariane Lühi remarks,
Le geste spécifique de la notation ainsi que le recueil de notes (en tant que livre constitué
d’un agrégat de textes) ont jusqu’à présent été marginalisés dans le domaine de la critique
littéraire, où la note est considérée comme un avant-texte, un brouillon ou un étape
intermédiare qui renvoient à un au-delà, ou alors comme une simple annotation d’un
autre texte. La note serait donc, dans cette perspective, incomplète par définition. (Lüthi,
Vers une poétique de la note 5)4
How to begin a coherent discussion of a text whose most characteristic feature is its
incompleteness? The notebook’s dichotomous relationship to literary “work”—to poetry, for
instance—adds complexity to any project that wants to go beyond an understanding of notes as
“pre-text” and enter into a discussion of the notebook as a form in its own right. Many
commentators on notes and the notebook-as-form stress its oddness and its hybridity,
underscoring the challenge it poses to traditional generic classifications: Is it a genre? A subgenre? Or might it more descriptively be conceived as a practice? In the absence of an
established body of work theorizing the notebook, scholars conceive their task as laying
groundwork, or feeling out the contours of a territory—doing work that is necessarily as tentative
and provisional as much of the note-writing to which they turn their critical attention.
In “Fausses notes: Pour une poétique du carnet, » Philippe Met writes,
On se propose ici—entreprise à la fois simple et complexe—de définir un objet et un
terriroire, c’est-à-dire non seulement de les délimiter, de les cerner, mais aussi d’en
formler les propriétés consitutives, le(s) sens et la portée. […] Ce mode d’écriture à
longtemps été (et jusqu’à aujourd’hui encore, parfois) dénigré, dévalorisé out tout
simplement ignoré, comme si, pour le dire en termes musicaux, il était par essence inapte

4

The specific gesture of note taking, like the notebook (any aggregation of such texts that constitutes a
book), has been marginalized in the domain of literary criticism, where the note is often considered a pretext, a draft or intermediate step that will return us to some writing of a higher order, or simply an
annotation to another text. Thus the note, in this perspective, is incomplete by definition. (Luthi 5)

58

à atteindre la note juste et ne pouvait dès lors produire que de déplorables fausses notes.
(Met 53)5
Philippe Met sketches a “long history” of the notebook, beginning with its 19th century origins
among the proliferation of the “petites genres” and “formes brièves en prose” (Met 54) and
tracing through the second half of the 20th century and the turn of the 21st “une résurgance ou
plutôt un essor important de la pratique du carnet, sinon toujours en vue de, tout au moins
menant à, la publication” (Met 54).6
From Baudelaire to Reverdy; from du Bouchet to Jaccottet; to writers of the 21st century
including Jean Maulpoix and Daniel Leuweurs, Met writes,
À défaut de presenter ici une archéologie en bonne et due forme, on se contentera de
mettre en valeur, autour d’un florilège de citations, quelques incontournables stations, par
quoi il apparaît crucial de passer avant d’en venir à des avatars plus récents, voire
extrême contemporaines. (Met 54)7
Met’s « canon » of notebooks and notebook writers leads him (following Reverdy) to conclude,
« En somme, le carnet n’est pas le substitut, non plus que la prélude ou la mise en train, de la
poésie, mais bien plutôt sa poursuite, son prolongement, par d’autres voies » (Met 57).8 Then
again, the question reasserts itself : prolongs poetry by which other means ? What does the
notebook look like? Met explores the ways in which the poetics of the notebook overlaps with
the broad category of une écriture de soi (life-writing), but also throws into uncertainty our

5

I propose—an enterprise at once straightforward and complex—to define an object and a territory, that
is to say not only to delimit them, to grasp them, but also to formulate their constitutive properties, their
meaning(s) and their impact. […] This mode of writing has been, for a long time (and sometimes still
today), denigrated, devalorized, or simply ignored as if, to put it in musical terms, it was essentially
incapable of striking the right note and could only produce deplorable wrong notes. (Met 53)
6
a resurgence or rather a boom in the practice of the notebook, if not always in view of, then at least
lending itself to, publication. (Met 54)
7
Instead of presenting an archaeology by the book, I settle for highlighting, by way of a compendium of
citations, several unavoidable stations, by which it appears crucial to pass before in making our way to
those more recent, even “extreme-contemporary” avatars.
8
In sum, the notebook is neither the substitute, nor the prelude nor the setting in motion of poetry, but
rather its pursuit, its prolongation, by other means.

59

assumptions about the authenticity and sincerity of autobiographical discourse: if notes are the
pretext for a work of literature, there is always the possibility that their function is to fictionalize
or falsify—they duck the strictures of authenticity demanded by the “pacte autobiographique,”
but at the same time often occupy a place of little value, in relation to the finished work (Met
57).
With the hope of resolving these difficulties, Met draws the following distinctions
between the “journal” (journal intime) and the “notebook” (carnet): Where as the journal—an
essentially egocentric project—marks a turn inward, the notebook is composed of “notations
diverses portées vers l’appréhension de la réalité…à travers une langue et une écriture qui
s’interrogent sur ells-mêmes tout en mêlant concrétude et abstraction.[…] [C]e regime d’écriture
délimite et redéfinit, en un sens, le champ originel, fondateur, de l’éxpérience littéraire” (Met
59).9 I think it is clear that this « clivage » between the domain of the journal and the domain of
the notebook, while useful, presents its own difficulties and further complexities. Though it may
be tempting to protest that Met is splitting hairs, carving up already marginal territory with more
margins, he is nevertheless making a crucial remark when he suggests that what distinguishes the
notebook from other types of life-writing is that it is preoccupied with the record of a pointedly
and self-consciously literary experience of the world, coming at its “apprehension of reality” in
and through language.
Ginette Michaud also takes up the question of the “poetics of the notebook” in her article
about the contrasting notebook-keeping practices of Octave Mannoni and Elias Canetti.
Michaud’s essay navigates the notebook “terrain” perhaps more cautiously than Met’s does. She
writes,
Diverse notations directed towards an apprehension of reality…through language and writing that
interrogate themselves, mixing concreteness and abstraction. […] [T]his regime of composition delimits
and redefines, in a sense, the foundational, original domain of the experience of literature.
9

60

Plutôt que de tenter une véritable poétique de la note, j’aimerais seulement circonscrire
par ces quelques propositions, elles-mêmes mimétiquement déliées, quelques-uns des
effets produits par l’accumulation des notes, “sans tri et sans apprêt,” à partir de pratiques
différentes, chaque fois singulières, où la note devient poétique.10
Michaud situates her work alongside studies in the epistolary form, by way of offering an
analogy for the type of writing to be found in these notebooks. Citing Vincent Kauffmann’s
L’équivoque épistolaire, she suggests that the territory of the notebook is analogous to the
equivocal, ambiguous space that separates correspondents from one another. In such “notes-toself,” address takes on “la forme particulière du retour à l’envoyeur, mais au prix de détours plus
tortueux, en tout cas plus tourmentés, qu’il n’y paraît” (Michaud 68).11 This suggests something
of the generic ambiguity of the notebook as form. Does it belong to a “body of work, or the
author’s life? Can we understand notebooks to constitute part of a writer’s literary oeuvre if, as
in many cases, the notebooks were never considered to be of primary interest by the author himor herself? Finally, how does the reader eventually receive such works?
Judging by Michaud’s characterization of it, Mannoni’s writings might well fall into the
category of “journal” rather than “notebook” according to the rubric Met offers in “Fausses
notes”: they are filled with self-reflexive effusions about the difficulty of keeping a systematic
journal (Michaud 70). But whereas Michaud describes Mannoni’s writings as “constamment
vouée à l’échec, coincée dans une double contrainte, oscillant entre le ‘trop’ et le ‘pas assez’’
(Michaud 73),12 she seems to feel that Canetti’s practice is of a different order. She writes,

10

Rather than attempting to articulate a true poetics of the note, I prefer to circumscribe, with these
propositions (correspondingly unsystematic), several of the effects produced by the accumulation of notes
“after no principle of selection and no window-dressing”, from the standpoint of two different practices,
by which notes become poetic.
Address takes on the peculiar form of a dead letter “returned to sender”—at the cost of detours more
circuitous and more troubled than they first appear. (Michaud 68)
12
Doomed to failure, pinched by a double constraint, oscillating between “too much” and “not enough”
(Michaud 73)
11

61

Vincent Kauffman mentionne de manière rapide dans L’equivoqe épistolaire une
hypothèse suggestive à propos des écrivains-épistoliers… : « Il y a ceux, écrit-il, qui
conçoivent leurs lettres comme une pratique littéraire, et ceux qui font de leurs textes
littéraires l’équivalent d’une lettre. » Ce renversement des proportions entre l’œuvre et la
note, les modes majeur et mineur, le monument et les miettes, on pourrait le transposer en
pensant au cas d’un autre écrivain qui a pratiquer la note de manière constante tout au
cours de sa vie d’écrivain, mais sur un mode sec et lapidaire, aux antipodes de celui
adopté par Mannoni : il s’agit des « Réflexions » d’ Elias Canetti.(Michaud pg #)13
This description suggests a way of redefining the categories Met sets up between those
documents that “note” the passage of time over the course of a subject’s life—namely, the
“journal” or the journal intime—and the notes that become a life’s work, taking on the stature of
a literary project: the “miettes,” the fragmentary and the throwaway, take on a “monumental”
significance. This “reversal of proportions” between “note” and “oeuvre” suggests that Met’s
distinction between “journal” and “notebook” might be more fluid than it seems. Such a reversal
has to be organized at least in part by a self-conscious effort on the part of the writer, to
reconceive what constitutes the domain of their own literary work—how they “read” their own
writing. Michaud’s epistolary premise serves to illustrate this connection between reading and
writing quite clearly. “Entre la note et le lecture, il y a de nombreuses affinités électives, leurs
rapports relevant de fait tellement de l’évidence qu’ils passent presque inaperçus, » she notices
(Michaud 82).14 This realization is what compels Michaud to conceive her project differently
from the way Met does.

In L’équivoque épistolaire, Vincent Kauffmann briefly mentions a suggestive hypothesis about letterwriters…: “There are those,” he writes, “who conceive of their letters as a literary practice, and those who
turn their literary texts into the equivalent of a letter.” We might transpose this reversal or proportions
between the “oeuvre” and the “note,” the major and minor modes, the monumental and the fragmentary,
onto the case of another writer who practiced note-making steadily throughout his writing life, but in a
dry and lapidary style at antipodes to the one adopted by Mannoni: The work in question is “Reflections”
by Elias Canetti. (Michaud )
14
There are numerous elective affinities between the note and reading; their rapport is so much in
evidence that it passes almost unapprehended. (Michaud 82)
13

62

The journal writer is always first a journal reader—first and usually most critical reader
of his or her own entries, points out Barthes in his essay, “Délibération.” He writes, “Je crois
pouvoir diagnostiquer cette ‘maladie’ du journal: un doute insoluble sur la valeur de ce qu’on y
écrit” (Barthes 423).15 This uncertainty seems to be something that prevents the writer from
turning journal-writing into literary work, and for Barthes it is the occasion for this personal
“deliberation.” He writes,
Mais, encore une fois, est-ce que cette bienveillance finale, attiente après avoir traverse
une phase de rejet, justifie de tenir (systématiquement) un journal? Est-ce que ça vaut la
peine ?
Je n’esquisse pas ici une analyse du genre « Journal » (il y a des livres là-dessus),
mais seulement une délibération personnelle, destinée à permettre une décision pratique :
dois-je tenir un journal en vue de le publier ? Puis-je faire du journal une “œuvre” ?16
The question that motivates Barthes’s deliberation is posed with studied insouciance that belies
the complexity of the inquiry he’s about to undertake. And yet, he insists that his task here is a
modest one: The heavy lifting of analyzing the journal as genre can be left to those who have
written whole books about it. Barthes makes it quite clear that is not pretending to offer a
systematic way of understanding the journal as “genre”—the following four motives for
justifying the “literariness” of journals are based on personal feeling: “Je ne retiens donc que les
fonctions qui peuvent m’effleurer l’esprit,” he writes (Barthes 424).17
Barthes’s taxonomy of the journal emphasizes different types of reading more than it
does different kinds of writing. These motives for turning the journal into a work are all
predicated on the question the writer asks of himself: What kind of journal would I like to read?
“I guess I could diagnose this diary disease: an insoluble doubt as to the value of what one writes in it”
(The Rustle of Language, trans. Richard Howard 359)
16
“But still, does this final indulgence, achieved after having traversed a phase of rejection, justify
(systematically) keeping a journal? Is it worth the trouble?
I am not attempting any kind of analysis of the “Journal” genre (there are books on the subject),
but only a personal deliberation, intended to afford a practical decision: Should I keep a journal with a
view to publication? Can I make the journal into a ‘work’?” (Howard 360)
17
“Hence, I refer only to the functions which immediately come to mind” (Howard 360)
15

63

It should be no surprise (recalling, of course, that Le Bruissement de la langue also contains the
essay, “La mort de l’auteur”) to discover that the post-structuralist lens Barthes brings to his
subject emphasizes the work of the reader in defining these categories over the work of the
writer. However, what is never quite explicit in “Délibération” is the way in which a journal’s
writer might anticipate the way in which a reader would receive his or her writing, or the way in
which outside factors might influence a text’s reception.
For instance, Barthes’s second motive, the “historical” journal, is a document that
necessarily becomes historical over the course of the passage of time and passage through the
hands of many different readers—some of them editors. We are left wondering about what
qualities might define the historical value or interest of a document and what forces determine
who receives that document and why. Does a text’s historical or documentary interest exclude or
override its literary importance? In the case of Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals, that question cuts
two ways, each to the ultimate detriment of its literary interest as a work in its own right.
Received as a document only of historical interest and with little literary value, the importance of
Dorothy’s literary efforts are discounted and submerged; received as a document of only literary
interest and no historical value, details recording the Wordsworth’s daily household life are
rejected as too trivial to be of interest to the reader. On the other hand, the third motive the
possibility that a reader’s interest in a journal might be motivated by the desire to access
precisely these trivial details. The “utopic” motive belongs to a reader who wants to know the
journal’s writer intimately. If the journal in question belongs to a writer of other literary work,
this reader’s interest in the life that surrounds the work may even exceed interest in the work
itself.

64

The first and last motives for justifying the journal’s “literariness” seem to envisage a
different order of relationship between the acts of writing and reading. The first one Barthes
imagines is the journal as “ un texte coloré d’une individualité d’écriture, d’un ‘style’ (aurait-on
dit autrefois), d’un idiolecte propre l’auteur (aurait-on dit naugère).”18 Barthes describes this
motive as the “poetic.” The final case Barthes offers could be the logical extension or
intensification of this impulse: the journal that becomes an “atelier des phrases; non pas de
‘belles’ phrases, mais des phrases justes; affiner sans cesse la justice de l’énonciation (et non de
l’énoncé), selon un emportement et une application, une fidélité de dessein qui ressemble
beaucoup à la passion” (Barthes 425). 19 This journal doesn’t simply record the performance of a
particular style, and is more than an example of the practice and refinement of an idiolect.
Barthes emphasizes that this journal is a text in which “la justesse de l’énonciation (et non de
l’énoncé)”—gesture of enunciation itself, rather than what is spoken—is being continually
refined, with an avidity closely resembling passion. This is the only motive that seems to fully
enter the domain of the literary, the only text in which the author—the speaker—seems to be
able to absent himself, leaving behind the sense of “attachement narcissique” that worries
Barthes when he considers his own work.
That narcissism, which Barthes qualifies, parenthetically, as “faiblement narcissique: il
ne faut pas exagérer” (Barthes 424),20 turns out to be more persistently troubling than his initially
light touch of the problem suggests. In the concluding paragraphs of “Délibération,” Barthes
wonders,

“a text tinged with an individuality of writing, with a ‘style’ (as we used to say), with an idiolect proper
to the author (as we said more recently)” (Howard 360).
19
“a workshop of sentences: not of ‘fine phrases,’ but of correct ones, exact language: constantly to refine
the exactitude of the speech-act (and not of the speech), according to an enthusiasm and an application, a
fidelity of intention which greatly resembles passion” (Howard 361).
20
“ faintly narcissistic—let’s not exaggerate” (Howard 360)
18

65

—Mais le journal ne peut-il être précisément considéré et pratiqué comme cette forme
qui exprime essentiellement l’inessentiel du monde le monde comme inessentiel? –Pour
cela, il faudrait que le sujet du Journal fût le monde, et non pas moi ; sinon, ce qui est
énoncé, c’est une sorte d’égotisme qui fait écran entre le monde et l’écriture ; j’ai beau
faire, je deviens consistant, face au monde qui ne l’est pas. Comment tenir un Journal
sans égotisme ? Voilà justement la question qui me retient d’en écrire un (car, de
l’égotisme, j’en ai un peu assez). (Barthes 436)21
Fabricating a consistent “I” which can never confront an inconsistent world without an “écran
entre le monde et l’écriture” might well be the most dangerous outcome the keeping of a journal
could accomplish. Suppose the writer who avidly pursues the refinement of the word is
mistaken? “[I]l n’est pas sûr que le Journal récupère la parole et lui donne la résistance d’un
nouveau metal,” Barthes warns (Barthes 437).22 He concludes that the only way in which this
dream of recuperation might be achieved would be by exhausting the journal altogether, turning
it into “un Texte à peu près impossible: travail au terme duquel il est bien possible que le Journal
ainsi tenu ne ressemble plus du tout à un Journal (Barthes 438-439).23 As we turn out attention in
the next section, to Philippe Jaccottet’s notebook, La Semaison, it will be important to keep
Barthes’s warning and the conditional hope he offers in his conclusion in mind. What might the
notebook become when it no longer resembles a notebook?

But can’t the Journal, in fact, be considered and practiced as that form which essentially
expresses the inessentials of the world, and the world as inessential? –For that, the Journal’s
subject would have to be the word, and not me; otherwise, what is uttered is a kind of egotism
which constitutes a screen between the world and the writing; whatever I do, I become
consistent, confronting the world which is not so. How to keep a Journal without egotism? That
is precisely the question which keeps me from writing one (for I have had just about enough
egotism). (Howard 370)
22
“It is not certain that the Journal recuperates the word and gives it the resistance of a new
metal” (Howard 372).
23
“a virtually impossible Text: a labor at whose end it is indeed possible that the Journal thus
kept no longer resembles a Journal at all” (Howard 373)
21

66

3. Practice and Poetics of the Notebook in Philippe Jaccottet’s La Semaison
In his preface to Landscapes with Absent Figures, Mark Treharne’s 1997 English
translation of Paysages avec figures absentes, Michael Hamburger speaks to Jaccottet’s appeal
to Anglophone readers, “Unlike that of many distinguished French poets of his generation,
[Jaccottet’s] work has not come up against a barrier to understanding and sympathy due to
fundamental differences between assumptions and practices in the two literatures” (Hamburger
iii). Philppe Jaccottet was born in Moudon, Switzerland in 1925—a region of the country known
to French-speakers as la Suisse romande—and became steeped in a tri-lingual Romantic
tradition. Jaccottet is well-known for his translations from the German of works by Hölderlin,
Rilke, and Musil; and from the Italian, works by Leopardi and Ungaretti.
Hervé Ferrage characterizes Jaccottet’s early writings as the work of a poet in search of a
voice : In his first published work, Requiem (1947),24 Jaccottet sought a poetic register that
would “s’élever tout de suite à un style sublime et faire oeuvre réparatrice en imitant de
prestigieux modèles poétiques et religieux’’(Dictionnaire de poésie de Baudelaire à nos jours
363).25 It is Jaccottet’s time in Paris, during which he met Francis Ponge, who helped him “à
réorienter son travail poétique: un style plus humble, un ton plus bas, des inflexions souvent
proches de la prose, un usage nuancé et libre des formes de versification traditionnelle (le sonnet
particulièrement) apparaissent alors comme autant de garde-fous contre les tentations d’un
lyrisme mal maîtrisé” (Dictionnaire 363).26 Another signal moment in Jaccottet’s career is his

It is interesting to note the way that Jaccottet’s starting place—a fascination with the funeral rituals of
ancient religions (Ferrage 363)—corresponds with William Wordsworth’s interest in the epitaph as a
poetic model.
25
“elevate him at once to sublime style of a recuperative project in imitation of prestigious religious and
poetic models” (Ferrage 363)
26
“to reorient his poetic work: toward a humbler style, a softer tone, a poetry whose inflections often
approached those of prose, and the nuanced and liberal usage of traditional forms of versification
24

67

discovery, in the 1960s, of Japanese haiku, a moment that, Ferrage writes, ‘‘a pour Jaccottet la
force d’une révélation aussi bien éthique qu’esthétique’’ (Dictionnaire 364).27
Jaccottet’s interest in la forme brève is sustained throughout his career, as the serial
publication of his carnets under the title, La Semaison, suggests. Hervé Ferrage writes, ‘‘Le titre
ici révèle clairement les enjeux du projet mis en œuvre’’ (Dictionnaire 365).28 La Semaison’s
epigraph comes from the Littré dictionary’s definition of “semaison”: “dispersion naturelle des
graines d’une plante.’’29 As Ariane Lüthi observes, “l’écriture des Carnets est d’emblée placée
sous la signe de la pensée organique et végétale’’ (Lüthi 252).30 Not only does the collection’s
epigraph place us “under the sign” of the organic, it places us in the temporal space of the cyclic
change of seasons. Moreover, this epigraph suggests a link between the gestures of reading and
writing that mirrors the temporal relationship between the gestures of sowing and harvesting: we
get the sense that the one is certainly the natural outgrowth of the other. La Semaison, carnets
1954-1979, La Seconde Semaison, carnets 1980-1994 , and Carnets 1995-1998 (La Semaison
III) were published by Gallimard in 1984, 1996 and 2001, respectively.
An English translation by André Lefevere and Michael Hamburger of selected writings
from the 1971 Gallimard edition (published under the title La Semaison: carnets 1954-1967) was
published by New Directions in 1977 under the title Seedtime: Extracts from the Notebooks
1954-1977.31 Seedtime represents the harvest of a number of selections from the 1971 Gallimard
edition of La Semaison. Lefevere and Hamburger’s process of selection reflects one of the

(particularly the sonnet) apparently as a safeguard against the temptations of an uncontrolled lyricism”
(Ferrage 363)
27
“had for Jaccottet the force of an ethical, as well as an esthetic, revelation” (Ferrage 364)
28
“The title here reveals the stakes of the project” (Ferrage 365).
29
“the natural dispersion of a plant’s seeds”
30
“This writing as a whole is placed under the sign of the vegetal and the organic”
31
If the material in the citations from La Semaison that follow appears among the selections included in
Lefevere and Hamburger’s 1977 translation, I will cite this edition in my footnotes.

68

outstanding features of La Semaison—the superabundance of these notes; their return again and
again to the same subjects and scenes: winter mornings, trees in bud, days of rain, the burning of
leaves in autumn, views of the mountains. The translators’ decisions must have involved the
choice to let one description of twilight stand in for the three or four that might surround it in the
context of the original progression of entries. Perhaps the most interesting of these decisions is
Lefevere and Hamburger’s choice to begin with an entry titled “1956 October,” rather than with
the entry that opens the original, on May, 1954.
The entry for October, 1956 is certainly consonant with the collection’s epigraph (also
omitted from Seedtime):
The reeds: how their velvety ears burst, allow the slow escape of a stream of seeds, a
crop, in the most absolute silence. A woman giving birth: moans of pain, blood, In
absolute silence, sweet, irresistibly slow, the plant busts and scatters itself on the mercy
of the wind. (Seedtime 1)
This choice does a double duty: introducing the reader to the metaphor that organizes La
Semaison, and letting Jaccottet’s writing unfold: we have here an image of dissemination, not
planting; a process that takes place almost passively, ineluctably, and in silence—the plant’s
voluptuous release of its seeds. The choice to begin with this entry also quite clearly stages the
notebook’s commencement in autumn, oddly folding together the seasons of seed-time and
harvest-time. In fact, Jaccottet’s La Semaison begins with an entry in May, 1954:
L’attachement à soi augmente l’opacité de la vie. Un moment de vrai oubli, et tous les
écrans les uns derrières les autres deviennent transparents, de sorte qu’on voit la clarté
jusqu’au fond, aussi loin que la vue porte ; et du même coup plus rien ne pèse. Ainsi
l’âme est vraiment changée en oiseau. (La Semaison 11)32

My translation: “Attachment to the self increases life’s opacity. One moment of true forgetfulness, and
all the screens one behind the other become transparent, so that clarity is visible all the way back, as far as
the eye can see; and at the same time, everything is lighter. Thus is the soul really transformed into a
bird.”
32

69

This is a beginning that is much more hermetic, less concretely descriptive than the entry chosen
by Lefevere and Hamburger. It records a deeply inward moment, a kind of seeing that has less to
do with the outside world than it has to do with a state of being. As such, it frames the notebook
in a markedly different way. Since I would prefer to focus on the contents of La Semaison, rather
than on a comparison between the original text and Lefevere and Hamburger’s “anthology” or a
discussion of the complexities of translating work like Jaccottet’s, I only want to suggest that
these different beginnings are both revealing, in that they bring two of Jaccottet’s linked
concerns to the fore.
The notebooks that comprise La Semaison combine prose, fragments or drafts of poems
that conclude in prose, prose that corrects or revises the verse. Ferrage comments, “
Cette façon de combiner et de faire jouer ensemble, à l’intérieur d’un même livre, des
proses poétiques, des notes de carnet et des poèmes ou des fragments de poèmes est la
manifestation d’une liberté nouvelle dont le sens mérite d’être précisé. […] La variété
devient la loi et témoigne du profond désir de pacifier non seulement la relation de
l’homme au monde mais aussi les rapports entre les différentes formes qui s’en veulent
l’expression.” (Dictionnaire 366)33
As a project, La Semaison is distinct from other books of poetry published concurrently.
Whereas, Ferrage contends, Paysage avec figures absentes, a collection of prose poems,
represents a more fully realized style of expression (Dictionnaire 365),34 the notebooks
ne sont rien moins qu’une matière brute offerte telle quelle au lecteur. […] Prises sur le
vif, au plus près de l’immédiat, elles cherchent essentiellement à préserver dans la trame
du quotidien les chances de la poésie. Le choix de la discontinuité qui caractérise cette
écriture, sa vivacité, qui empêche le mouvement trop aisément pacificateur de la belle

33

This way of combining and setting in motion all together, inside the same book, prose poems, notes,
and poems or fragments of poems, is the manifestation of a new poetic liberty, the meaning of which
merits a more precise examination. […] Variety is law and witnesses a profound desire to remediate not
only man’s relationship with the world but also relations between different forms to be given expression.
(Ferrage 366)
34
« …Paysages avec figures absents…offre sans nul doute l’expression la plus accomplie » (Ferrage 365)

70

prose, invente aussi une tension qui se prolonge dans l’acte même de la lecture.
(Dictionnaire 365)35
The discontinuity of Jaccottet’s notebooks is a feature that distinguishes them from his other
works—and it is preserved by the principle of selection he exercised in preparing La Semaison
for publication. Nevertheless, it’s evident across his oeuvre. Michael Hamburger, in the preface
to Landscape with Absent Figures, writes, “In fact it is in the empty spaces that a reader’s
responses have the most freedom and scope for movements of their own” (Hamburger v).
Jaccottet’s notebooks—“l’écriture de l’intervalle entre deux moments de la poésie” (Dictionnaire
365)36—enlist the reader in the process of filling those spaces. In La Semaison entries, separated
by asterisks, are presented under the headings that signal the year and month during which they
were recorded. However, the passing of time is hardly obtrusive. Entries are sporadic and the
movement that takes center stage in La Semaison is the cyclical change of seasons.
In his study of the poet, Philippe Jaccottet, le pari de l’inactuel, Hervé Ferrage remarks,
‘‘Le temps cyclique, les rythmes saisonniers […] : tel semble être en effet l’horizon temporal de
l’œuvre, la limite idéale vers laquelle est orientée toute une rêverie pacificatrice’’ (Ferrage
110).37 The linear progression of historical time, in Jaccottet’s worldview, does a kind of
arbitrary violence, senselessly reminding us of our own finitude. Only in this return to cyclic
time, Ferrage recounts, does Jaccottet see the possibility of coming to terms with this painful
reality:

“… are nothing more than raw material offered “as is” to the reader. […] Noted on the spot,
communicating a sense of immediacy, they are ultimately in recorded quest of preserving, in the midst of
the framework of daily life, the odds of the occurrence of poetry. The deliberate discontinuity that
characterizes this writing, its vivacity, which impedes easy-going, pacifying movement of “belle prose,”
establishes instead a sense of tension that prolongs the very act of reading.” (Dictionnaire 365)
36
“A writing of the interval between two moments of poetry” (Dictionnaire 365)
37
“Cyclic time, seasonal rhythms […]: this seems to be, in effect, the temporal horizon of the ideal work
towards which these dreams of bringing peace are oriented” (Ferrage 110).
35

71

La conscience douloureuse que nous avons de notre finitude ne peut prendre sens,
échapper à la malédiction de l’arbitraire et de l’absurde qu’à travers cette expérience
intime du temps cyclique, ce qui suppose patience, décantation, communion avec le
monde dans sa forme concrète saisonnière. […] Ainsi peut être établie une ultime
continuité entre vivre et écrire, la vie comme l’écriture relevant d’une même réalité, celle
d’un monde parfaitement centré où la répétition patiente des mêmes gestes défait toute
tension, ou du moins en dénoue la violence. (Ferrage 111-112)38
Thus, in part as a reaction to the horror and destruction he witnessed during his twenties in
World War II, Jaccottet’s poetry makes a marked retreat from modernity back to the cyclic
rhythms of the natural world and its seasons. For Jaccottet, discontinuity can only be made sense
of through an intimate experience of time involving patience, attentiveness, and communion with
the cycles of “the concrete world.” Moreover, Ferrage asserts here that such an experience
depends on the assertion of a literary experience of the world, a continuity between writing and
living that involves an experience of the world through language, through writing—that is,
writing as a practice, a patiently renewed gesture.
Ferrage writes, “Si les carnets de Jaccottet constituent un genre à part entier, c’est parce
qu’ils se veulent recherche de cet idéal qu’il ne leur appartient cependant pas d’accomplir”
(Ferrage 165).39 This comment resonates with many remarks about the notebook “genre”—or, to
put it more equivocally, the notion of the “notebook-as-form.” Ferrage’s remark underscores the
fact that Jaccottet explores, in the Carnets, a concern distinct from the ones which interest in his
collections of prose poems. Nevertheless, we should see La Semaison and prose poems like the

“Our painful consciousness of our own finitude cannot become meaningful, escape from the curse of
the arbitrary and the absurd, except through an intimate experience of cyclic time that requires a settled
patience and communion with the world in its concrete, seasonal form. […] So might we establish an
ultimate sense of continuity between living and writing, life and writing relevant to the same reality, the
reality of a perfectly centered world where the patient repetition of gestures dismantles tension or at least
works to resolve its violence.” (Ferrage 111-112)
39
“If Jaccottet’s carnets constitute a genre of their own, it is because they are in search of an ideal not yet
been accomplished.” (Ferrage 165)
38

72

ones collected in Paysage avec figures absentes as two faces of the same project. Michael
Hamburger writes,
Prose and verse serve as alternate media for these epiphanies, and poems are offered as
tentative vessels for them, too…tentative because what matters to Jaccottet everywhere is
the epiphany, rather than the vessel, the medium. That is why he admits seeming
impurities into his work, switches of tone and level that set him apart from some of his
French coevals. (Hamburger iv)
The notebook is a space that serves as a tentative register for these fleeting moments, and the
importance of such instants of epiphany for Jaccottet elevates the notes that capture them from
the status of a provisional, “impure” medium, permitting the abrupt reversals of register that, for
Hamburger, set him apart from his contemporaries. But Ferrage seems to insist that Jaccottet’s
carnet has aspirations that go beyond those of a mere-log book or receptacle for the fleeting
impression, a medium for epiphany.
If the notebook, as Ferrage suggests, constitutes a genre in its own right—if it is a form in
search of an ideal that hasn’t yet been attained—it seems imperative to rearticulate Hamburger’s
formulation of Jaccottet’s “tentative vessels” in a way that is more descriptive of this category of
writing, the note, as distinct from the poem (or prose poem) despite the many affinities between
these two forms.
Jaccottet’s title and epigraph for his notebooks suggest a reformulation of the notion that
epiphany is the origin of poetic creation. Seeds, too, are tentative vessels, except what they
contain is not the trace of a fleeting impression but rather pure potentiality. Ariane Lüthi writes,
La graine renvoie d’emblée à l’idée d’une certaine vitalité de la note : la graine pourra
germer, pousser, et attendre longtemps avant de s’ouvrir et de se transformer. Elle
symbolise les possibilités, le potentiel contenu dans ces petites capsules ; tout est en elle,
mais son développement éventuel dépend de divers paramètres. Rien ne garantit sa
fertilité, son épanouissement en fleurs ou en fruits, et la récolte est incertaine. (Lüthi
253)40
40

The seed altogether sends us back to the idea of a certain vitality of the note : seeds germinate, sprout,
and bloom only after a long period of expectation and transformation. They symbolize possibility,

73

The symbol of the seed aligns the note with a different kind of temporal horizon than the one
suggested by the “tentative vessel” of the poem. The promise of the note is always in what it will
accomplish—and, as Lüthi reminds the reader, it offers no guarantees. The tentative nature of the
note is of a different order than that of the poem: What’s at stake is not the question of whether it
will hold together, whether it will succeed, but rather whether it will develop, grow, blossom or
bear fruit.
Lüthi acknowledges that it seems quite logical to map the instantaneous, the epiphanic,
onto the note-as-form. She writes,
Les affinités entre la note et l’instant dans leur brièveté, fugacité et légèreté—laquelle
sera pourtant le plus souvent ressentie comme une sensation de plénitude et de
profondeur—sont manifestes. Mais peut-on aller jusqu’à réduire l’essentiel de la création
poétique à une suite d’instants discontinus, à une reprise d’éclaircissements plus ou
moins répétitifs—bien que variés—intervenant par intervalles ? (Lüthi 232)41
It seems quite natural to map the note-as-form onto the epiphanic instant, as though a one-to-one
correspondence existed between the two—as though we could take the note as a representative
trace of that moment in which its author experienced a fleeting sense of “depth and plenitude,”
but Lüthi wonders whether or not poetic creation can be reduced to a series of discontinuous
instants. I see her question, “Mais peut-on aller jusqu’à réduire l’essentiel de la création poétique
à une suite d’instants discontinus, à une reprise d’éclaircissements plus ou moins répétitifs—bien
que variés—intervenant par intervalles?” as implicitly reprising a question that Jaccottet asks of

potential contained in small capsules, but their eventual development depends on diverse factors. Nothing
can guarantee the seed’s fertility, its blossoming in fruits or flowers, and the harvest is always uncertain.
(Lüthi 253)
41
“The affinities between the note and the “instant” in their brevity, ephemerality, and lightness—that
which is so often felt a a sensation of richness and profundity—are obvious. But can one reduce the
essence of poetic creation to a series of discontinuous instants, the intervention of various revelations,
more or less repetitively reprised, at intervals?” (Lüthi 232)

74

himself in La Semaison ‘‘Mais comment passer de certaines notes poétiques au poème ?’’(La
Semaison 47).42
In the passage in which Jaccottet poses this question, he raises a distinction between the
“poème-instant” and the “poème-discours” Toward the end of a long series of entries dated
“1960, Mars,” he writes,
Mais comment passer de certaines notes poétiques au poème ? La voix retombe trop vite.
Il y a une difficulté intéressante dans l’opposition entre le poème-instant (celui de l’
Allegria d’Ungaretti) et le poème-discours qui a toujours été le mien, tel un bref récit
légèrement solennel, psalmodié à deux doigts au-dessus de la terre. 43
Jaccottet’s question is framed on either side by an opposition between the « poème-instant » and
the “poème-discours”. The difficulty of passage between these two categories is underlined by
his regretful admission, “La voix retombe trop vite”—this passage demands a special kind of
effort, the effort of sustaining speech or breath, of giving voice. But what exactly do these two
categories represent and how does Jaccottet map them on to the distinction between notes
towards a poem and the poem itself? Jaccottet describes the “poème-instant” by recalling
Ungaretti’s Allegria, but describes the “poème-discours” much more suggestively: the “poèmediscours” is something psalmodied, a song that seems to have the quality of a narrative,
something solemn but only lightly so, and something that lingers “à deux doights au-dessus de la
terre”—something unmoored, perhaps detached, floating just above the earth. It is for this form
that Jaccottet suggests he possesses a real affinity. Or perhaps what Jaccottet is saying “a

“But how do you proceed from a number of ‘notes toward a poem’ to the poem itself?” (Seedtime 21).
But how do you proceed from a number of “notes towards a poem” to the poem itself ? The voice falls
back too soon. There is an interesting problem in the opposition between the poem-instant (Ungaretti’s
Allegria) and the poem-discourse that has always been mine, like a slightly solemn story, psalmodied just
above the earth. How do you convey feelings, how do you establish a fragile equilibrium, something not
unlike a glass column, or even a column made of water, resting on the void? You lean on the poem itself,
a brittle support, half treacherous. It shines and crashes: a waterfall heard at night. The poem confused
with its object. (Seedtime 21)
42
43

75

toujours été le mien” is really the problem of the opposition between these two states: rather than
belonging to one side of the question or the other, Jaccottet lingers in the complex space
between.
Earlier in La Semaison, a 1959 entry dated “Octobre” seems to anticipate this
questioning. At the beginning of this entry, Jaccottet makes an explicit attempt to situate himself
(and his reader) in the temporal space that we may, perhaps, refer to as the “poème-instant.” He
writes,
Voici que maintenant l’or vire au rose, et que le vert des champs, des arbres,
foncé, passé du vert jaune au vert bleu. Flèches du vent. La route a la couleur de l’eau, de
l’ardoise. Quelques nuages sont déjà comme de la fumée. Intimité de la lumière dans la
chambre, sur le papier blanc qui à son tour est devenue presque rose. Une enveloppe
d’ombre sur les livres, les objets. Rien que le bruit du vent et des paroles.
Bientôt la nuit empêchera d’écrire sans lampe. Le jour n’habite plus que l’extrême
hauteur du ciel. Nous tournons le dos au soleil. (La Semaison 19-20)44
The very first sentences of this entry offer an expansive view—Jaccottet sketches a landscape at
dusk, noting the soft transformations light is working on its trees and fields, which pass from
“vert jaune au vert bleu,” and the softening lines of the road, which has turned “la couleur de
l’eau.” Even clouds begin to lose their distinctness. However, Jaccottet turns away from the
expansiveness of this landscape view—turns inward, towards the scene composition. It is as
though his attention is directed by the very fading of the light, which suffuses the page before
him, “qui a son tour est devenue presque rose.” As Jaccottet marks the fading of light—from his
page, from the room where shadows envelop his books and things—he seems to brush up against
the present moment almost vertiginously—recalling Georges Perec’s mise en abîme, “Still

44

“Now gold turns to pink, and the green of the fields, trees, grows darker; change from yellow to blue
green. Arrows of the wind. The road has the color of water, slate grey. A few clouds look like smoke,
already. Intimacy of light in the room, on the white paper that has grown almost pink in its turn. Books,
objects in a sheath of shadow. The sound of the wind and words; nothing else.
Night will soon make writing without a lamp impossible. Day lives on the highest peak of the sky
only. We turn our backs to the sun” (Seedtime 5).

76

Life/Style Leaf.” But in this case, the writer’s field of vision is increasingly limited by darkness,
objects are losing their contours and soon it will no longer be possible to write without a lamp:
“Nous tournons le dos au soleil.” The fading of light creates a peculiar space around this scene
where there is nothing, Jaccottet writes, “que le bruit du vent et des paroles”—a space without
images, where the visible is muted and fleeting and all that remains is the breath of the wind and
“des paroles”—a word which in French means words, but suggests speech; words perhaps
spoken aloud.
As day rounds the corner into night, Jaccottet observes,
Nuages mauves, lilas. Papier presque bleu. Un feu qui s’éteint. Je ne vois presque
plus les mots.
De l’autre côté c’est encore de l’or. Tandis qu’à l’est le bleu gagne. Or-argent.
Jour-nuit.
Élever une fois de plus l’ornement sur la nuit, l’abîme. Ornement rêvé : à la fois
savant et musical, ferme et sourd, vaste et caché. Modèles : Hölderlin, Leopardi, quelques
poèmes de Baudelaire.
Mouvement aisé dans l’immense. Oiseaux. Autres exemples, les plus beaux peutêtre, chez Dante: Dolce color d’oriental zaffiro… Mais aujourd’hui plus de thomisme, de
nombres sacrés, etc. Solitude, abandon, menaces, et d’autant plus doux le saphir.
Réserves (absurdes bien sûr !) : sur les allégories et les pensées de Leopardi, la
tension de Hölderlin, les attitudes de Baudelaire. 45
Nightfall seems to deliver Jaccottet into a new moment, a space of contemplation, and a different
kind of discourse. Distinctions between “Or-argent” and “Jour-nuit” have collapsed, and we have
lost track of the “instant,” and Jaccottet’s writing becomes allusive, abstracted, and synthetic, as
he makes leaps among texts by Dante, Baudelaire, and Leopardi. This is a different meta45

Purple clouds, lilac. Paper almost blue. A fire that goes out. I can’t see the words any more,

almost.
Still gold on the other side, but the blue wins in the east. Gold-silver. Day-night.
Raise the jewel above the night once more, above the abyss. Dream-jewel: learned and musical in one,
solid and mute, vast and hidden. Models: Hölderlin, Leopardi, a few poems by Baudelaire.
Movement is easy in the infinite. Birds. Other examples, the most beautiful maybe, in Dante:
Dolce color d’oriental zaffiro…But no Thomism left, these days, no sacred numbers, etc. Lonliness,
resignation, threats, and the sapphire so much sweeter.
Reservations (absurd, of course): Leopardi’s thoughts and allegories, the tension in Hölderlin,
Baudelaire’s poses. (Seedtime 5)

77

reflection on the practice of the notebook from what we saw earlier, where Jaccottet was
recording the literal passage of fading light across his page. Now, Jaccottet’s preoccupation
seems to have turned from the process of writing to the process of reading. Here he introduces a
new gesture: “Élever une fois de plus l’ornement sur la nuit, l’abîme.” His prose itself becomes
ornamented with allusions to the poetry of his models—he dreams of a gesture at once « savant
et musical, ferme et sourd, vaste et caché.” The “poème-instant” seems to hover against the dark
background of immensities, abysses, like a lifted jewel; like a star. The process of reading, for
Jaccottet, nevertheless remains a self-conscious moment, an interrogation as well as reflection: it
is with lingering reserve that he contemplates the notion of “mouvement aisé dans l’immense.”
This entry concludes with a re-valuation of that gesture—lifting up a jewel against the
night—that seems to define the “poème-instant,” that luminous interruption of the “poèmediscours,” for Jaccottet. There must be a different model, he concludes:
Autre chose devrait être tenté peut-être, où trouvent accord non pas paisible, mais vivant,
légèreté et gravité, réalité et mystère, détail et espace. L’herbe, l’air. Des entrevisions
infiniment fragiles et belles—comme d’une fleur, d’un joyeau, d’un ouvrage d’or—
situées dans l’extraordinaire immensité. Astres et nuit. Discours vaste et fluide, aéré, dans
lequel peut prennent place avec discrétion les joyaux de langage. Comme ce qui apparaît
aussi, de loin au loin, dans la brume. Ou alors on est penché sur une besogne modeste, et
soudain on se rappelle la profondeur de l’espace et du temps.46
Perhaps, Jacccottet seems to be suggesting, this model needn’t be so grand : something else
could be envisioned or attempted. On the one hand, you have “Discours vaste et fluide, aéré,

46

Something else ought to be tried, maybe, where light and heavy, reality and mystery, detail and
space enter into harmony, not peaceful, but alive. Grass, air. Glimpses infinitely fragile and beautiful—as
of a flower, a gem, a golden artifact—placed in the extraordinary immensity. Stars and night. Discourse
vast and liquid, airy, in which gems of language take their place, discreetly. It appears in the mist, at
times, far away. Or else you perform some menial task, and suddenly remember the depths of space and
time. (Seedtime 4-5)
46
How do you convey feelings, how do you establish a fragile equilibrium, something not unlike a glass
column, or even a column made of water, resting on the void? You lean on the poem itself, a brittle
support, half treacherous. It shines and crashes: a waterfall heard at night. The poem confused with its
object. (Seedtime 21)

78

dans lequel peut prennent place avec discretion les joyaux de langage.” On the other hand, could
it be that something equally precious might present itself in a more humble setting? “Ou alors on
est penché sur une besonge modeste, et soudain on se rappelled la profondeur de l’espace et du
temps.” That modest task might well be the keeping of a notebook. Ariane Lüthi reflects,
L’écriture régulière de la note apparaît donc comme un exercice de spontanéité : le poète
y cultive son attention, que l’on peut appréhendre comme forme d’étude—des variations
ou improvisations—pour l’état de disponibilité nécessaire aussi à l’émergence du poème.
(Lüthi 237)47
In some ways, the conclusion of this entry seems to anticipate and even suggest answers for the
questions Jaccottet finds himself asking several months later. The question of how to move from
notes toward a poem to the poem itself seems to be addressed by a practice of constantly
preparing oneself for it—a preparation that consists of the most humble and repetitive of tasks.
Then, in the midst of this “modeste besogne,” the “poème-instant” mysteriously arrives—one
recalls the depth of space and time.
Jaccottet’s questioning forges ahead, however, prolonging the tension between these two
moments of the “poème-instant” and the “poème-discours.” In the close of his 1960 entry, he
poses another question:
Comment faire sentir, fixer un équilibre fragile, quelque chose d’analogue à une colonne
de verre, ou même d’eau, s’appuyant sur du vide ? On s’appuie sur le poème lui-même, et
c’est un frêle appui, partiellement trompeur. Il brille et s’écroule : cascade entendue la
nuit. Confusion du poème et de son objet. (La Semaison 47)48

47

The regular writing of notes thus appears to be an exercise in spontaneity : the poet cultivates his
attention, something that can be learned like an object of study—through variations and improvisations—
in order to achieve the particular state of availability necessary for the emergence of a poem. (Lüthi 237)
48
But how do you proceed from a number of “notes towards a poem” to the poem itself ? The voice falls
back too soon. There is an interesting problem in the opposition between the poem-instant…and the
poem-discourse that has always been mine, like a slightly solemn story, psalmodied just above the earth.
How do you convey feelings, how do you establish a fragile equilibrium, something not unlike a glass
column, or even a column made of water, resting on the void? You lean on the poem itself, a brittle
support, half treacherous. It shines and crashes: a waterfall heard at night. The poem confused with its
object. (Seedtime 21)

79

Jaccottet’s poetics of the notebook is the strange thing that treacherously supports this
question—you have to lean on it, despite its fragility. And it supports itself, Jaccottet suggests,
like a “cascade entendue la nuit,” a cascade of water that in the dark might take on the quality of
something solid, a confused wash of sound—“Confusion,” Jaccottet writes, “du poème et son
objet.” This problem, “comment faire sentir”—how to convey feelings—is perhaps the central
question at stake in the lyric tradition. Certainly, as we have seen, it is the one that preoccupies
William Wordsworth. Jaccottet conveys it as the problem of establishing a fragile equilibrium.
The writings in La Semaison, cumulatively, are all tending towards that delicate point, as they
prolong and extend but never un-do the tension that knits together the “poème-instant” and the
“poème-discours.”

80

CONCLUSION
Throughout my work on this project, I’ve been haunted by two essays about Dorothy
Wordsworth and her journals, the first by Elizabeth Hardwick from Seduction and Betrayal, and
the second by Virginia Woolf, from The Second Common Reader. Both of them convey a
remarkable sense of this woman; both seem to be written out of a desire to know her, to imagine
what she must have wanted and what she must have felt, but despite each writer’s sympathetic
attitude toward their subject, they seem unable to articulate a possibility for understanding
Dorothy Wordsworth as a figure distinct, in her life or her work, from her brother William. The
towering stature of her sibling and the uncertain status of the luminous prose recorded in her
journals—which often served as a repository for William’s poetic work—make Dorothy
Wordsworth a difficult starting point, but I began this project with the following question in
mind: How to describe the “poetic” project that seems to grow out of Dorothy Wordsworth’s
journals? In my research, I was looking for a vocabulary that would help me talk about these
journals as literary works in their own right, texts that could stand alongside William
Wordsworth’s poetry.
I have proposed revisiting Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals through the lens of a “poetics
of the notebook.” The notebook occupies an ambiguous territory between theory and practice—it
is the space in which the “work” of writing takes place. Reading Philippe Jacottet’s La Semaison
helped me refine my understanding of what a poetics of the notebook might mean. Jaccottet’s
body of work integrates writing of poetry with the practice of keeping a notebook, and the
question he poses—“Mais comment passer de certaines notes poétiques au poème?”—suggests
to me that what has really been at stake in my investigation has been an attempt to articulate the
relation between William Wordsworth’s poetry and Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals.

81

That relationship is at the core of this project: William’s poetry, Dorothy’s journals, and
the complicated terrain where these bodies of work overlap, the shared space that uneasily
straddles the boundaries we conceive of as separating life and the literary work. Dorothy
Wordsworth’s journals expose the obverse of William Wordsworth’s poetry, calling upon us to
challenge the mythic qualities of a poetics that insists, problematically, that “all good poetry is
the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings” (Works 598) with the proviso that “it takes its
origin from emotion recollected in tranquility” (Works 611).
In an article about Jaccottet’s La Semaison, Carrie Noland writes,
The “Carnet” forces the conventions of the lyric tradition to a point of crisis by
foregrounding the inherent contradictions of a poetic idiom desiring simultaneously to
reassemble and immobilize on the one hand, and to draw attention to the work of writing
on the other. (Noland 80)
When we read William Wordsworth’s poetry alongside his sister’s journals, we suddenly seem to
come much closer to the ‘crisis’ point of the lyric tradition than, perhaps, Wordsworth himself
realized. Though the project he frames in the “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads is that of poetic
experiment, its risk is contained in a myth of return and a language renovation—its work is the
work of correcting and purifying, returning the lyric form to what it truly is and should be, “the
image of man and nature” (Works 605). In La Semaison, Jaccottet makes the risk that the lyric
might be irreparably broken, entering or on the verge of entering into precisely the state of crisis
Carrie Noland describes, very plain. Jaccottet is acutely aware of the tension between the two
signal gestures around which La Semaison is structured: sowing and harvesting; gathering and
dispersing.

Perhaps what threatens poetry when the lyric tradition is at a point of crisis is the antipoetical. Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals certainly contain much that is not poetry—accounts

82

ofhousehold tasks, physical ailments, all the trivial, banal, even irritating minutiae of the
quotidian—and we must surmise that her writing life was under constant threat of interruption
and was ultimately curtailed by the demands of domestic life. So does La Semaison contain
innumerable descriptions of everyday landscapes: such a profusion of autumnal twilights and
spring mornings exposes the toil of writing itself and risks banality.49 But, as Jaccottet writes,
“Autre chose devait être tenté peut-être…on est penché sur une besogne modeste, et soudain on
se rappelle la profondeur de l’espace et du temps” (La Semaison 20).50
Though he exposes—or dwells very near to—the inherent contradictions of the lyric
tradition (that it seeks to “reassemble and immobilize” (Noland 80) even as it exposes and
inhabits the moment in which that process of reconstruction takes place), Jaccottet never
abandons its central concerns. Like William Wordsworth, he is unable to let go of the question
“Comment faire sentir, fixer un équilibre fragile…?” (La Semaison 47).51 How do you convey
feelings? This is the question Wordsworth tries and, as I have shown, fails to answer in Essays
upon Epitaphs—the best he can do is to insist that such communication does happen, for without
the conveyance of feelings through some “subtle process,” “such a hollowness would pervade
the whole system of things, such a want of correspondence and consistency, a disproportion so
astounding betwixt means and ends, that there could be no repose, no joy” (Prose Works 52.9398). Likewise, the note on which Jaccottet ultimately falls is this: “Confusion du poème et de son
objet” (La Semaison 47).52 The continuity between the poem and its object is the result of a
confusion that has to be maintained, as in a fragile equilbrium.

49

The obvious interlocutor for Jaccottet here is Francis Ponge.
“Something else ought to be tried, maybe… you perform some menial task, and suddenly remember the
depths of space and time” (Seedtime 5)
51
“How do you convey feelings, how do you establish a fragile equilibrium…?” (Seedtime 21)
52
“The poem confused with its object” (Seedtime 21)
50

83

As a hybrid form, the notebook both prolongs and embodies that search for a fragile
equilibrium at the heart of the lyric tradition. If the “poetics of the notebook” offers a new lens
for understanding Dorothy Wordsworth’s journals, it’s clear that the project of carving out space
for her work alongside William Wordsworth’s poetry is not enough—the real task will be to
appreciate how her writings propel our inquiry into the hopes and limits of the lyric tradition
forward, and contribute to our understanding of the unfolding of a history of poetry.

84

WORKS CITED
Alexander, Meena. “Dorothy Wordsworth: the grounds of writing.” Women’s Studies 14
(1998):195-210. EBSCO. Web. 20 Jan. 2014.
Barthes, Roland. Le Bruissement De La Langue. Paris: Seuil, 1984. Print.
—. The Rustle of Language. trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1986. Print.
Brownstein, Rachel Mayer. "The Private Life: Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals." Modern
Language Quarterly 34.1 (1973): 48-63. Academic Search Premier. Web. 29 Apr. 2014.
Cardonne-Arlyck, Elisabeth. « Mind Your Tongue : Autobiography and New French Lyric
Poetry. » New Literary History 33.3 (2002): 581-601. JSTOR. Web. 12 Dec. 2013.
Combe, Dominique. “La référence dédoublée: Le sujet lyrique entre fiction et autobiographie.’’
Figures du sujet lyrique. Comp. Dominique Rabaté. Presses Universitaires de France,
2001. 39-63.
de Man, Paul. “Autobiography as De-facement.” MLN 94.5 (1979): 919-30. JSTOR. Web. 12
Dec. 2013.
De Quincey, Thomas. Reminiscences of the English Lake Poets. London : J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd,
1961.
Ferrage, Hervé. Philippe Jaccottet, le pari de l’inactuel. Littératures Modernes, Presses
Universitaires de France. Paris : 2000.
—. "Jaccottet, Philippe." Dictionnaire de poésie de Baudelaire à nos jours. Ed. Michel Jarrety
and Yves Bonnefoy. Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 2001. 363-67. Print.
Gittings, Robert and Jo Manton. Dorothy Wordsworth. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1988. Print.
Hamburger, Michael. Preface. Landscapes with Absent Figures. By Philippe Jaccottet. Trans.
Mark Treharne. London: Delos Press/Menard Press, 1997. iii-v. Print.
Hardwick, Elizabeth. “Dorothy Wordsworth.” Seduction and Betrayal: Women and Literature.
Homans, Margaret. Women Writers and Poetic Identity. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1980. Print.
Jaccottet, Philippe. La Semaison: Carnets (1954-1979). Paris: Gallimard, 1984. Print.
—. Seedtime (La Semaison) : Extracts from the Notebooks, 1954-1967. Trans. Michael
Hamburger and André Lefevere. New York: New Directions, 1977. Print.
—. Landscape with Absent Figures. Trans. Mark Traherne.

85

Levin, Susan. Dorothy Wordsworth and Romanticism, Revised Edition. Jefferson, North
Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc, 2009. Print.
Lüthi, Ariane. Pratique t Poétique De La ote hez eor es Perros t Philippe Jaccottet.
Paris: Éditions du Sandre, 2009. Print.
Met, Philippe. “Fausses notes: Pour une poétique du carnet.” French Forum 37.1-2 (2012) : 5367. Project MUSE. Web. 12 Dec. 2013.
Michaud, Ginette. "Fragments, journaux, carnets: Prendre tout en note, noter le rien." Urgences
31 (1991): 67-84. Érudit. Web. 14 Apr. 2014.
Perkins, David. Wordsworth and the Poetry of Sincerity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1964. Print.
Wordsworth, Dorothy. The Grasmere and Alfoxden Journals. Ed. Pamela Woof. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002. Print.
Wordsworth, Jonathan, M. H. Abrams, and Stephen Gill. Preface. The Prelude, 1799, 1805,
1850: authoritative texts, context and reception, recent critical essays. Ed. Jonathan
Wordsworth and M. H. Abrams. New York: Norton, 1979. N. pag. Print.
Wordsworth, William “Essays upon Epitaphs.” The Prose Works of William Wordsworth. Ed.
W.J.B. Owen and Jane Worthington Smyser. Voll. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press-OUP,
1974. 45-122. Print.
Wordsworth, William. William Wordsworth: The Major Works. Ed. Stephen Gill. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1984. Print.
Woolf, Virginia. “Dorothy Wordsworth.” The Second Common Reader. New York: Harcourt,
Brace, Jovanovich, 1960. Print.
Woof, Pamela. “Dorothy Wordsworth as a Young Woman.” Wordsworth Circle 38.3 (2007):
130-138. EBSCO. Web. 20 Jan. 2014.
—. "The Uses of Notebooks: From Journal to Album, Commonplace to Keepsake."
Coleridge Bulletin ns 31 (2008): 1-18. The Friends of Coleridge.
Web. 29 Apr. 2014.

