Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2015

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2015

Joanne Kyger & "The Rush"
Kelsey Ann Davis
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Davis, Kelsey Ann, "Joanne Kyger & "The Rush"" (2015). Senior Projects Spring 2015. Paper 72.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2015/72

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring 2015 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Joanne Kyger & “The Rush”

Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Language & Literature
of Bard College
by
Kelsey A. Davis

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2015

i

Acknowledgements
Thanks to:
My advisors, Cole Heinowitz and Deirdre D’Albertis-- Cole, for introducing me to Kyger
and for guiding me as I read these difficult poems and researched around them. Deirdre,
for all her generosity (and patience) as I finally began to write about them.
Betsy Cawley & Jeremy Hall, who devoted hours to helping me with my research and
helped me to order materials from UCSD.
And, of course, my family, for their continual love and support.
*
This project is dedicated to my library pals & fellow moths-before-light: Sorrel, Annie,
and Cypress.

ii

Table of Contents

Note to the Reader............................................................................................................. 2
Part I-- The Poet and The Muse.............................................................................. 8
Part II-- A “Voice”.................................................................................................17
Part III-- The Rush.................................................................................................24
Part IV-- Reading The Tapestry & The Web and
Kyger’s Observational Poetics...................................................................31
Conclusion............................................................................................................. 45

Appendix I............................................................................................................. 48
Appendix II.............................................................................................................48
Appendix III............................................................................................................52
Appendix IV............................................................................................................62
Bibliography...........................................................................................................65

iii

Joanne Kyger & “The Rush”

“Joanne Kyger, March 1980, Venice, CA” Alastair Johnston 1

“When I was trying to do a portrait of Joanne I was surprised to discover that Joanne isn’t
Really beautiful. But-- she is. Beautiful. Sexy. A poet (Three books out) Married twice.
Lived four years in Japan, Thinks a lot about what it’s all about. Is afraid she might turn
in to an eccentric. Just bought a house. And__ vulnerable. Joanne seems very vulnerable
to me. And not afraid of being so. Not That one necessarily has a choice. You find
yourself where you are. But you can admit it, or not admit it. (where you are) and Joanne
admits it. I always have the feeling that Joanne is on the verge of Asking me a very
important question. Or trying to tell me something very important. I’m not sure which.
Probably, both.”
-- Joe Brainard, 1971 2

1

Johnston, Alastair. A Rogue's Gallery of Literary and Artistic Types. 2004.
http://www.poltroonpress.com/rogues.html.

2

Brainard, Joe. The Collected Writings of Joe Brainard. Library of America. 2012, 316
1

Note to the Reader
In the spring of 1957, Joanne Kyger dropped out of UC Santa Barbara and moved
to San Francisco. She was then just a fledgling writer. It was at an opportune moment for
a poet to land there-- Jack Spicer’s Magic Workshop has just ended, Black Mountain
College has just closed, and the Howl Obscenity trial was ongoing. The Beat poets, Black
Mountain poets, and the poets who gathered at “The Place” with Jack Spicer and Robert
Duncan (from here on described as the “North Beach Scene”), were brought in to close
quarters. The poets gathered at houses and in bars every night. The poems they worked
on during these meetings were read at locations around the city, such as the Beer and
Wine Mission. Published on Auerhahn, White Rabbit, Coytoe Press, Jack Spicer’s J and
the Open Space magazines. Although these poets were writing outside of an institution,
these were very serious meetings. One writer said, “Your poem was on the line that week
and that [the poem] was your life.” 3 As intimidating as it was for young male poets, for
women interested in poetry, there were even more challenges in place.
In the late 1950s, poet Harold Dull wrote a particularly lucid description of Kyger
in his notebook while sitting at a Sunday afternoon poetry reading in San Francisco:
“George [Stanely’s] eyeglasses are tiny clear lakes... Ebbe [Borregaard’s] great bushy
eyebrows, tree-tops.... Joanne’s fandango cape or shawl she twirls in a huff about her
shoulders-- a wisp of a cloud.”4 What strikes me in this description is how Kyger’s cape
(and by extension, Kyger herself) is described as part of the view but not the landscape.
Kyger is present, but unattached. Or, only so attached. What seems to be keeping her
there is her performance of a certain feminine role-- how dramatic is Dulls’ description of

3

Ellingham, Lewis, and Kevin Killian. Poet Be Like God: Jack Spicer and the San
Francisco Renaissance. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press, 1998, 116
4 ibid., 110
2

the cape she “twirls about her shoulders.” This paper will investigate how the social
challenges of Kyger’s early poet-hood impacted the poetics that she developed through
out her life.

This thesis began as a study of poems of Kyger’s in which, to borrow Alice
Notley’s term, we see “ordinary actual life finding itself.” 5 (I will refer to them as
“observational poems” from here out.) I began by working on poems published in Places
to Go (1970), The Wonderful Focus of You, (1980) Trip Out and Fall Back (1974),
Desecheo Notebook (1971), Phenomenological (1989), Patzcuaro (1999), and others
smattered through her greater body of work. But, it became clear quite quickly that I was
not going to be able to understand these poems if I did not study her early life and work
closely. The lessons, social and poetic, that Kyger learned with the Beats and in the North
Beach poetry scene had a profound impact upon the way that she worked for the rest of
her life.

In Kyger’s other observational poems, I am drawn to the way that Kyger manages to
exalt domestic scenes and objects without use of easy symbolism or metaphor. Monarchs,
persimmons, narcissus, quail, waves, the moon-- these things become charged by a means
that is still mysterious to me. It might be by their continual appearance-- they appear so
frequently, and with such specificity, that one would think she kept them around for
writing about. I found them difficult to speak about at first. And, still find them difficult.

Consider “October 29, Take it Easier,”
5

Notley, Alice. "Joanne Kyger's Poetry." In Coming After. N.p.: University of Michigan
Press, n.d.
3

I wonder what the ocean is like today?
Cold and flat, hot and flat?
Cold and whippy, tide out, in? The sand
will be warm, I’m sure
for the sun is out today, and although not warm
in the house
It is in the spot I am going to now.6

The humor, light, and gratitude she brings to any moment and to ordinary things is
personally inspiring. Andrew Schelling might say that her poems prompt and instruct
readers how to “live close to the bone.” 7 But, though there is something irresistible-- and
useful, invigorating-- about these poems, they are deceptively difficult to talk around.
It’s true-- from without, the poems might seem just be lovely lists of happenings.
Doodles. I am not the only one who thinks so-- the contemporary reception of the poems
is similar to mine. The May, 1972 issue of the Beauline magazine (one of several
magazines published in Bolinas in the 1970s) includes this poem by Kyger’s friend Ellen
Sanders:
I swear to god
Me and Angelica
w.Juliet
met a a diabetic monkey
in a tree on Hawthorne
in the sheriff’s yard
6
7

Kyger, Joanne. As Ever. 79
Andrew Shelling, Voices from the American Land
4

and if that is not as good as Tom or Bob or Lewis or Joanne or even Bill can do
You Can Kiss My Ass 8
But, there is clearly something here. In “When I used to focus on the worries,
everybody,” a poem that Kyger wrote in the mid-seventies, she articulates the
observational impulse she acts upon in “October 29.”
We are in easy understanding.
Scarcely talking, thoughts pass between us.
It is memory. As I search to find
this day’s sweet drifting. The fog out to sea, the wind. 9

Ammiel Alcalay writes of poems, like “October 29,” which “search to find the day’s
sweet drifting: “For Kyger there is a constant and ongoing recognition that relying on
received perception and memory is never enough, that such ties must be loosened through
observation, vigilance, and active thought.” He celebrates her for “always bringing things
and thought back in to a phenomenal world that defies definition.” Alcalay’s statement
helps us to understand that part of the mystery of these poems is that, though they have
been published, their purpose is not entirely for the reader. 10

8

Osptedal, Kevin. "A Literary History of the San Andreas Fault: Bolinas Section."
http://www.jackmagazine.com/issue3/renhist.html., Chapter 5
9 Kyger, Joanne. As Ever: Selected Poems. Edited by Michael Rothenberg. New York:
Penguin, 2002, 206
10 Not all of her poems work on this logic. Joanne, (actually, my favorite of all her
work), The Imaginary Apparitions, The Life of Naropa poems, The Life of Helena
Blavatsky, the more political poems of her later years, in God Never Dies.
Often those other poems seem to be working through a theoretical space which
informs the movement or content of the observational poems. But, it seems,
reviewing a timeline of her work, that at any given point she might have been
working on poems like these. But, the observational poems are a constant in her
5

When one considers the spiritual practice which underlines Kyger’s poetics, it
becomes clear that these poems are not making a point, but attempting to do something-they work more like spells than statements.11 On a panel, at Naropa University in 2000,
Kyger said that “Paying attention to the details of daily life [in poetry] became a part of
what I perceived as Zen. Paying attention to the details of daily life so they didn’t become
the mundane thing of the quote housewife. They become the things of what your daily
life were made up of. “12 The resulting poetics is about movement. For Kyger, poetry is a
way of following experience so closely as to liberate it from being just an act of social
performance. 13
Understanding how deeply connected poetry and social performance are for
Kyger is, I think, is the key to managing the difficulty of Kyger’s observational poems.
This connection, I believe, was established for Kyger in those days when she was reading
in the homes of North Beach poets.
In my thesis, I will focus just on working through the poems in The Tapestry and
the Web which anticipate Kyger’s observational poems of the 1970s- 2000s. Kyger was
writing these poems between 1958 and 1963. During that time, she was living in San
Francisco, and then as an expat in Japan with other Beat writers. The poems that she
wrote during this time are not quite observational, but they assert the presence of the

career, following The Tapestry & The Web. The first proper instance of that appears
in Places to Go, in prose form.
11 The spiritual practice might be a slightly fraught one, subject to many of the issues
of ‘Beat Zen.’ For a further discussion of Zen in the late 50s see Beat Zen, Square Zen,
and Zen by Alan Watts.
12 “Women and the Beats Panel”
13 For an interesting discussion of spells as they pertain to Kyger’s work, see
Nix, Jennifer. "Finding Poetry in Illness." The Poetry Foundation. Last modified May 9,
2012. http://www.poetryfoundation.org/article/243994.

6

body, and work toward and are impacted by social performance in a way which
anticipates the liberating attention of her observational poetics. Although they have been
neglected by scholarship, I would argue that these “proto-observational” poems are
critical for understanding her later work.
Her early and late work operate, both, not only as objects on the page, but as
objects intimately connected to their author’s embodiment, though on different terms-the later poems pay attention to detail as a way of preventing Kyger’s days from
becoming those of the “quote housewife.” But, while Kyger is living in San Francisco,
she develops a poetics which accommodates and facilitates the conditions of her social
performance. It seems to me that in order to understand the political and social import of
her later poems, it is necessary to take in to consideration the difficulty of those early
years.

7

Part I-- The Poet and The Muse
I. Groundwork
In her book, “I made you to find me.” Jane Hedley writes that for the women she
studied, “being female may have worked for them by working against them, in that it
brought each of them inescapably to grips with the question of who she would be
speaking as in her poems and where she would be speaking from.” 14 This is certainty
true for Joanne Kyger. Kyger was working in a community in which the pressures against
women were particularly high. Women artists were forced to contend with obstacles both
internal and internal to produce their work. When she is asked in an interview, “What
was it like for you as a woman poet in this group?” She says,
Most of them were gay, which sexuality was out of the way... We could
just be friends. And, I don’t think-- you know, that question is asked a lot,
and I don’t think there was the same kind of feminist identity in the middle
fifties that people have now. I think it’s something that has evolved. At
that point, it wasn’t yet of interest. Most women that I went to school with
in Santa Barbara were not interested in what I was interested in... No, I
didn’t know any women who were contemporary writers. 15
While there might have been plenty of models of women writers available to her in the
larger American frame, there were none in her immediate sphere. “I understood that the
brotherhood of the beat writers-- they had their voices-- I was never discouraged from
writing, ever, but there was never a place for me, among them. I was essentially on my

14

Hedley, Jane. "Making 'You' to find 'Me.'" Introduction to I Made You to Find Me: The
Coming of Age of the Woman Poet and the Politics of Poetic Address, 1-25.
Columbus, Oh: The Ohio State University Press, 2009.
15 Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger." Places to Go: Joanne Kyger to Breaking
the Rule of Cool, edited by Nacy Grace. Jackson: University Press of Missisippi,
2004.

8

own.”16 In 1957, precisely when Kyger moves to San Francisco, there were some women
writing-- Jan Kerouac, Carolyn Cassady, Joyce Johnson wrote alongside their husbands.
17

But, they were not poets, but diarists who wrote furtively.

Those women who were writing poetry at that time did so secretly. Frances Jaffer writes,
“I told myself in advance that I didn’t have to show any of my poems to men” 18 Hettie
Jones said “I stuck my poems from that time in a drawer.”19 As far as I can tell, most did
not aspire to writing and sharing verse alongside the men, or even consider it an option.
Kyger attributes women’s’ exclusion from the “brotherhood” of poets to a
nonsense construction of inspiration which was trending at the time. In a 1983 interview,
Kyger recalls, “Gary Snyder told me that a woman couldn’t be a poet because she really
couldn’t have a muse.” 20 Beat women like Kyger, Jones, Cassady, etc. faced internal
constraints. Space was made for them in the community as “muses,” not speakers. So,
they did not speak publicly. A challenge for Kyger was to work inside the social persona
of “the muse” that allowed her to be engaged with these writers, but do so without
internalizing too deeply this idea that she might not speak or write publicly for herself.
In discussions of the relationship of the poet to (presumably) his voice in the
1950s and 60s, the muse-poet construction became a way for poets to discuss-- or mask-their inheritance of Romantic ideas about inspiration and gender. (One which the
Romantic poets had, in turn, inherited it from generations of writers before them.) In
16

“Women and the Beats Panel” Audio File. Naropa Poetics Audio Archive. June 2000.
archive.org/details/Women_And_The_Beats_Panel_June_2000_00P013
17 An exception to this is Diane Di Prima, but Kyger did not know of her at this time.
18 Jaffer, Frances. “For Women Poets, For Poetry: A Journal Entry.” In The Poetry
Reading: A Contemporary Compendium on Language & Performance, ed.
Stephen Vincent and Ellen Zweig. San Francisco: Momo’s Press 1981, 61
19 “Women and the Beats Panel”
20 Kyger, Joanne. "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed." By Diane
Middleton-McQuaid and John Thorpe. Convivio 1, no. 1 (1983), 113
9

Women Writers and Poetic Identity, Margaret Homans makes an appraisal of the
experience of women poets in the Romantic era which I think could apply to the writing
of the San Francisco Renaissance as well. She writes, “Where the masculine self
dominates and internalizes otherness, that other is frequently identified as feminine,
whether she is nature, the representation of a human woman, or some phantom of desire.”
21

Woman’s reduction to mysterious other results in what Homans describes as “her

exclusion from a traditional identification of the speaking subject as male.” 22
In a panel discussion held by Charles Olson, Robert Duncan, and Allen Ginsberg
in 1963, we see the men of the San Francisco Renaissance working through these same
issues. The discussion is called is called “Duende, Muse, and Angel,” and in it the
participants think through the nature of poetic inspiration, and work to reconcile these
terms. It becomes clear in the course of their discussion that while these figures are
thinking about nature in the same terms that Wordsworth was, they are nonetheless still
inheritors of this tradition of thought which frames the speaking subject as male.
At some point, Olson, who always dominates the discussion, says, “For
Wordsworth, nature had become a substitute for this thing that we’re now talking about.
Like, literally nature, You go out and look.” 23 Olson says, a substitute. As if the
conception of a (feminine) figure of inspiration were so necessary that it was justifiable to
say that Wordsworth had gotten it wrong.

21

Homans, Margaret. Women Writers and Poetic Identity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1980., 12
22 ibid.
23 Olson, Charles. Muthologos: Lectures and Interviews. Edited by Raph Maud. 2nd ed.
N.p.: Talonbooks, 2010, 68.
10

Kyger understands that how deeply engrained this construction of the speaking
subject is in the culture. In 1963, she writes a vexed journal entry expressing her
frustration:
My ground self
has got humor too
The rock bottom
exactly the same
I’m the country
You are the voice
I can’t be without you
At rock bottom is a hollow soul,
lady is the land, small like a seed
and the big voice the man
(what woman ever writes a poem “America I Love You”) 24
Kyger sees lady framed as the land, but not granted its bigness, only its mystery
(hollowness), and possibility (as of seeds). Its potential can not be actualized without
nourishment of voice. She says, “I can’t be without you,” mocking the assertion that
woman, or land, is dependent on man, or masculine voice, to come in to meaningful
being.
In the Romantic era, the women whose writing remains for us imagined new ways
of speaking, which could be compatible with their identification with the “hollow”
subject and un-actualized potential. In the 50s and 60s, the pressure on women to
disavow their own artistic ambitions was obviously not as high as it was in the Romantic
era. Still, they allow themselves to assume subordinate or secretive writing roles, as
Dorothy Wordsworth did. (I see her as being involved in poetic production from the
sidelines, writing journals, participating in William Wordsworth’s poetic process as an

24

Kyger, Joanne. The Japan & India Journals 1960-1964. Bolinas, CA: Tombouctou
Press, 1981, 234. The last line of this poem is ostensibly referring to “Next to God
of course America,” by E.E. Cummings.
11

observer and commentator, and leaving the public voice entirely to him.) So too,
women’s poetry was seen as “missing something.” It was less marketable.
Women in “the scene” were viewed as more suited for the role of the muse than
the poetess. In Making You to Find me, The coming of age of the Woman Poet and the
Politics of Poetic Address, Jane Hedley finds evidence for this in her study of the way
that women’s poetry was marketed at mid-century, often apologizing for the femininity
of their authors. (Even popular authors, like Sylvia Plath.) 25
Kyger intuits this cultural stigma. While, in her later years, Kyger has no trouble
assuming the identity of a poet. She says in an interview in 1974, “Well once you’re in to
poetry and it gets in to your life you can’t turn back from it.” 26 But, as a young woman,
Kyger hesitated to describe or present herself as a poet at all. She reports that she never
wanted to be a “poetess.” She wanted to be “bigger than that”-- a writer. 27 Kyger chooses
the genderless writer over poetess, an identity that could more easily satisfy her
ambitions as a thinker and a maker.
And yet-- Kyger, as a young woman, was quite shy about her writing. Kyger says
that she wrote first in her twenties. In college, she wrote largely in prose. “At first it was
a somewhat anguished look at the world, seeking catharsis,” she says. 28 Writing was,
from the start, about personal engagement rather than ambition. Although she had started
a writing group with Mark di Suervo and his brother, and even started a literary magazine

25

Hedley, Jane. Making 'You' to find ‘Me.’ 2
Lawrence, Nahem. "A Conversation with Joanne Kyger."
Note: “dedicated” is one of the words most frequently used to describe the 2000
Jacket magazine feature on her, in which poets and poetics scholars write about her.
27 Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger." Places to Go: Joanne Kyger to Breaking
the Rule of Cool, edited by Nacy Grace. Jackson: University Press of Missisippi,
2004, 144
28 Kyger, Joanne. "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed." 111

26

12

with them, and later wrote a “silly column” in the college newspaper called “Easy
Come,” she never read her own work out loud. 29
Likewise, when Kyger moved to San Francisco, it was without an explicit desire
to become a poet. In 1957, Kyger dropped out of UC Santa Barbara and went running to
San Francisco with her friend Nemi Frost, from whom she had heard stories about Robert
Creeley and John Altoon. She describes that moment in time this way:
The howl obscenity trial is happening, spring 1957. I visit City Lights
Book store and fall I love with the tone, the truth... A friend from my job
at The City of Paris, a young painter named Jerome Mallmann take me to
The Place, a famous writer and poets’ bar run by Leo Krikorian, formerly
a student at Black Mountain College. This is where it’s really happening...
30

What was important to Kyger was fame or dissemination of her work, but being engaged
“where it was really happening.” So, when she encountered what Linda Russo calls “the
masculinist concept of the poet as maker,” (the poet whose female counterpart was not
poetess, but muse) and playing “the muse” seemed to offer her access to this community,
she did not fight it. She says, “I decided to become the muse, in that case.” 31
It would be easy to read this as an act of self-subordination. But, I argue that “the
muse” an inactive role, nor a waste of time for Kyger. Playing “the muse” was a strategic
social maneuver. Has she not given in to this social performance, she might not have had
access to the group. By playing “the muse,” she was able to build a space for herself
among the writers that she admired, and gain access to their teachings, support, and work.

29

ibid.
CUNY, 2
31 Kyger, Joanne. "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed.", 113
30

13

II. Playing the Muse
When asked in an interview, “How does it feel to be a Muse?” Kyger said,
You live your life in relationship to poets and become the source of their
material.You become the instiller who keeps things moving and amusing
and keeps putting music on. I thought I could warm people up and pat
them on the back and bring them messages, as some way of using my wits
and questioning them. 32
It was expected that, as a woman, she would contribute to poetic production obliquely (as
Dorothy Wordsworth did.) And, she does for a while. This is indeed how people describe
her in that time-- the other members of the North Beach poetry scene remember her
particularly ‘standing out’ by her unconventional, ‘impolite’ and indulgent behaviors and
dress. Nemi Frost recalls Joanne doing cartwheels in the park one evening. 33 Tom Field
remembers Joanne drinking from a saucepan with Nemi at the Dunn’s. 34 She participated
enthusiastically as the ‘muse,’ putting the music on for others. Even in her own
descriptions of herself, Kyger emphasizes her muse-playing and her social performance:
“I visit [North Beach] every night in my red Capezio slippers with silver buckles. I have
them re-heeled every two weeks. I drink devastating martinis and hear Kenneth Rexroth
and Lawrence Ferlinghetti read poetry with jazz at The Cellar...” 35
The problem arises when Kyger does start writing and sharing poetry. (At some
point, the form calls to her, and she begins writing simple pieces, childhood memories in
her spare time, or while she working at Bretano’s bookstore.) Things come to a head in
the Fall of 1957, when Kyger is confronted by George Stanley, of all people. (A recent
32

ibid.
Ellingham, Lewis, and Kevin Killian. Poet Be Like God: Jack Spicer and the San
Francisco Renaissance. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press, 1998, 100
34 ibid., 108
35 Kyger, Joanne. "from Joanne Kyger." The Electronic Poetry Center.
http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/kyger/autobiography.html.
Originally Published in ContemporaryAuthors Autobiography Series, Volume 16
33

14

review of Stanley’s work begins, “George Stanley's poems often take place in bars.”) 36
He said to her, “Some people are treating these meetings just like a party.” It is as if he
was entreating her-- well, Joanne, do you want to be a woman or a poet? 37

III. Writing as the Muse
In Doctor Williams’ Heiresses, Alice Notley, poet and personal friend of Kyger’s, writes,
I’m not all that interested in being a woman, it’s just a practical problem
that you deal with when you write poems. You have to deal with the
problem of who you are so that you can be a person talking.38
This was certainly true for Kyger. Following George Stanley’s confrontation, Kyger was
forced to consider the use and limits of her social persona. It seems that abandoning her
social performance was not an option. But, she was also being entreated to share her
writing. The challenge was to construct a poetics that would allow her to speak without
jeopardizing the social rapport that she had accumulated by playing to the muse/ poet
construction.
Being part of “the scene” is important to Kyger’s development as an artist. A
resource available to her was the discussion surrounding Charles Olson’s Projective
Verse happening at that time. The way that poets were thinking about sound and the body
in poems-- about the significance of form-- offered an alternative to (masculine, inspired)

36“GEORGE

STANLEY.” Poetry Society of America.
https://www.poetrysociety.org/psa/awards/frost_and_shelley/shelley_winners/200
6/
37 In Fiery Forms, scholar Suzanne Juhasz, writes of women who are interested in writing
verse, “Usually she is pressured or pressures herself to make a choice: woman or poet” 37
This was certainly the dilemma that Kyger found herself up against. (Juhasz, Suzanne.
Naked and Fiery Forms: Modern American Poetry by Women, A New Tradition. New
York: Octagon Books, 1978, 2)
38 Notley, Alice. “Doctor Williams’ Heiresses: a Lecture.” Tuumba Press, 1980.

15

voice by which “hollow forms” and “seeds” could become actualized, and suffused with
meaning or beauty.
When Kyger begins to read her work, it is on these terms that it is praised. The
impression I have of her reception to the community is quiet-- a smattering of comments
on this, form. She says, the first reading was at Ebbe Borregaard’s. Spicer said, “What are
your plans for poetry?” and Harold Dull said, “Ssh, leave her alone.” 39 She recalls that
Robert Duncan’s response was, tellingly, “There are a few things I could teach you about
the line.” Forming such relationships empowers Kyger to be adventurous in her writing,
to read in public, to publish her work.

39

Alcalay, Ammiel, ed. "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne Kyger."
The CUNY Poetics Documents Initiative, 3rd ser., 7 (Fall 2012), 2
16

Part II-- A “voice”
I. Lessons on Consonants
It is not a coincidence that Kyger’s reading of “The Maze” in particular coincides
with a sudden burst of positive critical reception from Duncan. The poem runs on
principles he taught her about Projective Verse. It moves, despite discontinuity in places,
on the power of the syllable, the tight musical weave of alliterations and assonances.
Kyger was not new to Projective Verse at the time she was writing “The Maze.” She
says, Joe Dunn gave her a copy in 1957), but its principles are exceedingly apparent in
her work once Duncan begins to advise her closely.40
Kyger’s 1958 workshop notebook begins with four pages on the syllable. In it she
writes pages upon pages about the syllable. Despite her own disdain for detail-work-- she
writes in The Dharma Committee, on October 9, 1958, “Duncan’s class met last night and
more talk about vowels and consonants-- the boredom of it to me relieved only by the
fact that Robert arrived quite high on martinis.”41 But, she writes down an assignment for
herself: “Find out all you can about double consonant-clusters. Consonants begin a word.
More than one consonant together
Black Bird
Clutches at our finger
The black bird rises...” 42

40

Kyger, Joanne. "The Community of THE CURRICULUM OF THE SOUL." Harriet
(Poetry Foundation Blog). Entry posted August 28, 2012. http://The Community
of THE CURRICULUM OF THE SOUL.

41

Kyger, Joanne About Now: Collected Poems. N.p.: National Poetry Foundation, 2007.,
381
42 Kyger, Joanne. "Notebook: Duncan Poetry Workshop 1958-1959." 1958. Box 19:
Folder 6. Joanne Kyger Papers, 1950 - 2009. University of California: San Diego,
San Diego, CA.
17

The principles that she learned in that workshop are so pronounced in “The Maze” that it
seems almost to be an announcement of her allegiance to Robert Duncan’s teachings.
Look just at this stanza:
Behind the
tall thick muslin of the curtain
we could see his shadow
knocking
and we waiting
not stirring
The whole poem runs more or less at this tenor. The tenets of Projective Verse are even
more apparent in Kyger’s writing than in Duncan’s. Kyger does not work closely with
Projective Verse through her whole career. By the time that she is writing Going On, she
has, in fact, returned to prose poetry. 43 But, making this connection was a strong
diplomatic move for her. By engaging with his ideas about form, attention, and time in
“The Maze,” Kyger makes her work available to Duncan’s conversation.
Duncan writes briefly about “The Maze” in As Testimony, an essay that began as
a candid letter to George Stanley, arguing about what was going on in North Beach. What
he says of her work is this:
Joanne Kyger’s poem began “I saw”; the sound lingered as a base tone
(where the world awe never merges) thru the diminished o of walk, all,
fall, water, for the sound of water was that sound rushing,) on to the close
with the word walls. “And so I walkd” she writes, “wanting to fall. 44

43

She says of Tapestry, “I oversaw the lines very carefully to be sure hat the flow
was moving across the page and that it accurately represent the passage of writing.
Spicer would refer to this period as “completing my maze.” The second book, Places
to Go, got more adventuresome. I felt that language would move of it’s own accord.”
(see "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed,” 117)
44 Duncan, Robert. As Testimony: The Poet and the Scene. San Francisco, CA: White
Rabbit Press, 1964, 18
18

Duncan calls attention to the small parts of Kyger’s form, her lines, and within them, her
syllables. But, it’s worth noting that even as Duncan celebrates her use of Projective
Verse, this only comes alongside a description of her physical presence.
Duncan ostensibly places her front & center in his essay, As Testimony: The Poets
and the Scene. But, while the essay claims, in its opening note to be “beginning as a letter
from Robert Duncan to George Stanley and referring to a poem by Harold Dull and later
to one by Joanne Kyger,” and includes copies of both “The Maze” and “The Door,”
Duncan really writes only about “The Door.” Kyger’s poem itself receives maybe a
paragraph or two of analysis. It is merely counterpoint to Dull’s. What she gets credit for
is her body language and her conversation: “As in the scene Sunday I see Joanne Kyger
kneeling. There had been a chair, but she sits always on the floor, not crouching Sunday,
but on her knees when the poem was read.” Later, he writes “At tea, Tuesday, Joanne told
me this part of the legend...” and he goes on to recount her story, without mentioning her
again. 45
The liminal zone between muse and poet that she here occupies will only be a
useful space for her for so long. In spite of Duncan’s mentorship, Kyger clearly had to
pursue her own poetic project in order to progress as an artist.

II. The Body in Projective Verse
In her early career, Kyger does not dismantle the poet/muse binary, but recognizes
its ridiculousness for herself, and then uses it to carve a space for herself in the scene. She
said, on a panel, “I labored under these conceptual restraints for a while until I realized it
was nonsense.” When pressed on this issue, she uses gendered metaphors to scramble the

45

ibid., 13
19

sense of the poet-muse binary: she said that as a young woman, she would “do things like
dressing and cooking and being the midwife for any great writing that might come along
(the men’s writing).” 46
But, the time that Kyger spent playing the muse is not totally lost on her-- her
experiences then go on to inform and to develop a poetry that is completely her own.
Duncan’s writing on Kyger in As Testimony demonstrates that, for Kyger, social
performance and poetry go hand in hand. Kyger is welcomed as much on the merit of her
embodied social performance as on the quality of her poetry. It is not a leap, then, to
think that the poetry itself might be shaped by these social performances. In Kyger’s case,
I believe this lead to an insistence on asserting the presence of her body in the poetry.
Later in life, Kyger describes Gary’s imperative that she play the muse a
“warning that any writing I might do might not be inspirational.”47 Her engagement with
Projective Verse, then seems to be an acknowledgement, or an avoidance of, that
problem. Her poems run on technical precision, resonating not at the level of idea or
inspiration, but in the way that sound brings feeling to the body.
A great deal of the emotional thrust of “The Maze’ lies in Kyger’s deft
manipulation of sound. This is especially apparent at the end of the poem. The last stanza
begins:
She
tortures
the curtains of the window48
This is such an animated piece of text, a break from the beginning of the poem, which is
melancholy and unhurried, but precise. The effect has something to do with the sudden
46

“Women and the Beats Panel”
ibid.
48 Kyger, Joanne. As Ever, 3
47

20

shift in the placement of the lines on the page. (Before this point in the poem, few lines
deviate from the margin.) At the moment Penelope begins to shred the curtains of the
windows, the suddenly fluid placement of the line on the page gives the reader, or
listener, a jolt. The shape of the line does not let the reader breathe in a steady,
comfortable pattern as in the first half. The breath pattern is suddenly capricious, erratic.
Listening to Kyger read the poem, we hear her lurch at several spots. It is jarring. Kyger
seems to be drawing attention to the fact that her poem originates from a physical being
and has a physicality of its own.
She adapts some of the lessons she learned from Duncan about syllables to this
end as well. The most obvious example of this is the connection between “I saw” in the
first line of the poem, and “walls” at the end. A more extended pattern is her
manipulation of the soft ‘e’ sound. Kyger builds up and wears down the affect on this
letter throughout the poem. Lines will go by in which the only soft ‘e’s that appear are in
words like “begged,” “never,” and “dead,” which carry a sense of hopelessness. And,
then suddenly, she will break this pattern by throwing in something softer with an ‘e’-“delighted,” “caressed,” or “melodies.” Consider,
Held captive in a cave
Ulysses
sobbed for his wife
who was singing high
melodies
from the center of a ...
In the second of these two stanzas, “melodies,” isolated on its own line, breaks the hard
affect building on that ‘e’ sound. But, in the last stanza (the one in which Penelope tears
the curtains), the type of affect associated with the soft ‘e’ sound ceases to fluctuate.
Though the sound is equally important here, it only appears only in words with a violent

21

feeling-- “shreds,” “insect,” “demented,” “web,” and “possessed.” This only enhances
the physical jolt that her lines give one listening to the poem.
In her exploration of The Tapestry & the Web, To Deal with Parts and Particulars
(2002), critic Linda Russo makes the smart suggestion that I hear echo. It is by
manipulating formal aspects of the poem (like line placement and sound repetition) that
Kyger finds release from some of the expectations of a masculinist poetic. Russo puts it
nicely-- because Projective Verse situates poetry in the body rather than in the mind or
field of inspiration, it offers “new mode of poetic authority that diverges from masculine
conceptions of the role of the poet as maker.” 49
It’s true that Olson had advocated for the inspiration model of poetic authority. He
had been present at the panel discussion I cited earlier in this paper about modes of
inspiration. Indeed, it was he who said: “For Wordsworth, nature had become a substitute
for this thing that we’re now talking about.”50 But, in Projective Verse, he calls the poem
the “Boss of all, the ‘Single Intelligence.’” Within the scope of Projective Verse, there is
no authority outside of what is on the page. The poem is viewed as separate and superior
(in intelligence) to the poet. The materials of the poem-- the syllable, the line, words-- are
to be dealt with carefully as materials of any other art form. 51 So, Projective Verse
situates the origin of poetry in (genderless) bodily attention. It is poetry by way of “The
ear, the eye, the breath.” He writes, “And the line comes (I swear it) from the breath,

49

Russo, Linda. "To Deal with Parts and Particulars: Joanne Kyger’s Early Epic
Poetics." In Girls Who Wore Black: Women Writing the Beat Generation, edited
by Ronna Johnson and Nancy Grace. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press,
2002, 179
50 Olson, Charles. Muthologos, 68
51 Another passage from Projective Verse that might be of interest:“[words] must be
taken up as participants in the kinetic of the poem just as solidly as we are accustomed to take what we call
the objects of reality; and that these elements are to be seen as creating the tensions of a poem just as totally
as do those other objects create what we know as the world.”

22

from the breathing of the man who writes, at the moment that he writes, and thus is, it is
here that, the daily work, the WORK, gets in.” Not inspiration, but work. Labor, such as
any body is capable of doing.
Kyger says, that in this poem she had found a “voice,” precisely the quality that
she felt had been socially unavailable to her when she first moved to San Francisco
because of the emphasis that her peers placed on the muse-poet construction. 52 But, I
would argue that she never feigns to find a “voice” which comes from inspiration and
abstract feeling. Only the one which comes literally from the body. Playing “the muse” is
a social strategy that remains useful to Kyger for years. Joe Brainard writes of her on his
visit to Bolinas in 1971, “Everyone seems to have a high school crush on Joanne Kyger.
(Me too.) “53And, the influence of this social performance, which I have sketched in this
chapter, continues to show itself in her poetry.
It makes sense that if Kyger felt that her acceptance and authority in the scene
were dependent on her ability to perform socially with her body that she would write
from her body, and to other bodies as well. Kyger’s demonstration of the tenets of
Projective Verse operates as a girder or a mast in the poem, asserting the integrity of her
labor and her intention in writing.
Part III-- The Rush
I. Reading Otis Consciousness
Let me offer my transcription of a poem that Kyger reads in 1978 for Public
Access Poetry. In it she describes the way that her social performance informs her writing
practice. It is of interest to me because in 1978, Kyger is writing primarily the

52

Alcalay, Ammiel, ed. "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne Kyger,”

2
53

Brainard, Joe. The Collected Writings of Joe Brainard. Library of America. 2012, 296,
23

observational poetry I discussed in the introduction to this project. As my paper
progresses, I will continue to argue that the emphasis she places on physical attention in
those poems is something that I see as having roots in Kyger’s performance of the muse.
This poem, Otis Consciousness give me a useful language for talking about the way that
Kyger understands the connection between direct attention, the body, and social
performance. The poem runs,
... Enough to have all of this happening or none of this happening I tell
you sometimes I wish my body I mean I hate it when I get tired, like I’d
like to see the whole world and the universe and heaven and all human
beings from before now and forever more and everything all at once,
every single instance that never stopped or even began. Did I say it all? ...
That’s why I want to go down town tonight, just in case, but first I’m
going to take a shower and wash my hair. And I’ll see what happens. 54
Kyger finishes reading. Then she says, “that’s called a rush.” It is unclear whether Kyger
is referring to the state of expanded, altered perception that she imagines in the first half
of this poem, or to what’s “going on downtown tonight.” This makes me think that she
considers them one in the same, at some level.
What I’m interested in here is the way that Kyger frames her hair-washing in light
of both of these “rushes.” First, Kyger is reconciling the difficulty of her desire for an
expanded perception of “every single instance that never stopped or even began” and the
constraints of her body.55 Her particular bounded perception, its lock in time is crucial to
any perception, but it is also a limitation for her. If Kyger wants to “see what happens”,
she has to go do so with her body. Second, Kyger is reconciling the necessity of her

54

"Memory Stick." mp3 audio file, 1:14. Penn Sound. Accessed April 27, 2015.
http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Kyger.php
(Note: I do not know if the original poem was in verse or prose)
55 What she describes, I imagine, is something like what D.T. Suzuki would describe
as a moment of Satori. Kyger begins reading Suzuki when she is in college and when
she first moves to San Francisco.
24

social performance to the potential unfolding of this. To “see what happens,” she has to
play a certain social game: she has to wash her hair.
Bathing, and specifically hair-washing are concerns that Kyger takes up
frequently in her writings, often to this same conclusion. 56 An instance in Joanne (1973),
Kyger’s “novel inside-out,” speaks directly to Otis Consciousness:
I am walking up the path
I come home and wash my hair
I am bereft
I dissolve quickly
I am everybody 57
In both of these poems, we see hair-washing operating as a necessary opening space to
experience. To me, it speaks to Kyger’s understanding of the relationship between her
social performance and her spiritual/ poetic projects. Washing is a task of daily
maintenance & sanitation, but it is also an act of vanity, part of a social performance. For
Kyger, the body-- and by extension, her social performance-- is always present as an
anchor to experience. It follows that social performance would anchor her poetic practice
as well. Seeing as Kyger’s presence in the community was so long dependent upon her
physical presentation, it makes sense that she develops a poetry that does not take for
granted physicality as a resource or as a limitation.

56

Other hair-washing poems which operate on similar grounds include Morning
Mess and Tuesday, October 28, 1969 Bolinas
57Kyger, Joanne. As Ever: Selected Poems. Edited by Michael Rothenberg. New York:
Penguin, 2002, 101
see appendix for context, correct spacing and line placement
25

In the first two parts of this project, I argued that Kyger’s poetics responds to the
particular conditions of her female embodiment by insisting on physicality in poetry. We
might think of that as an attempt on my part to articulate the way that Kyger’s poetry
reflects how she, as a woman, navigated a literal search for the social “rush” of belonging
to the major artistic movements of her time.
In what follows, I will observe how, as Kyger makes a shift toward writing more
observational poetry, the poems themselves become about finding a “rush,” social and
spiritual, in quieter moments. In the observational poems in Going On, Trip Out and Fall
Back, Phenomenological, etc. (as well as in the poems in Tapestry which anticipate them,
like “Waiting” and “The persimmons are falling,”) Kyger develops a poetics which helps
her work towards meeting her experiences, finding “the rush” in anything.

II. Cultural and Critical Context
We can read Kyger’s poetics of the “rush” as a push against the cultural pressures
in the 1950’s and 60’s that discouraged women from engaging and voicing their
interiority. The pressures arise from what Elaine Tyler May calls the “domestic
confinement culture” of the 1950’s, an “internal reverberation” of foreign policy
initiatives by the same name. 5859 It has its roots in the rising popularity of therapy, one
tool which promised to make the home a safe oasis for the family-Professionals became the experts of the age, providing scientific and
psychological means to achieve personal well-being. The therapeutic
approach that gained momentum during these years was geared to helping
58

May, Elaine Tyler. Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era. N.p.:
Basic Books, 2008, 16
59 George F. Kennan first used the term in regards to the American strategy for
preventing influence of the Soviet Union from spreading around the world. The term
was also used to refer to strategies for coping with the reality of the atom bomb.
26

people feel better about their place in the world, rather than change it. It
offered private and personal solutions to social problems. The family was
the arena in which that adaption was expected to occur... 60
May argues that the popularization of therapy and its encouragement of “adaptation”
impacted women especially. When May reviews surveys she finds story of woman after
woman who, through pressure to suppress ‘unacceptable’ urges, become estranged from
the truth of their own experience.
One, named Norma, writes of her dissatisfying marriage “Inadequate as it seems
in some respects it will last us ‘till death do us part’ and we’ll live on an even keel.” 61
Though therapy promises to surface one’s emotions, thereby offering “private and
personal solutions”, it encourages a culture in this era, of shutting off one’s attention to
ones’ needs and experiences in favor of “the even keel.” It serves to rationalize and
suppress feelings, estranging individuals from their “inadequate” lives-- essentially,
remaining comfortable as they wait.
Kyger expresses disdain for the confinement culture in her early poetry and early
life. She understood that the pressures of the “domestic confinement culture,” extended
through beat counter culture as well. At least, for women. Kyger herself writes,
There were very few women that set out to be independent thinkers. There
was the beat chicks-- yeah they were really emancipated-- they stayed in
the kitchen all the time... Women thought about being intellectually
independent. That was a goal or an aim. 62
Kyger sets out, as a young woman, to avoid becoming economically dependent on a lover
or a husband. And she works at a dry good store called the City of Paris.

60

May, Elaine Tyler. Homeward Bound, 17
ibid., 189
62 Russo, Linda "Introduction: a context for reading Joanne Kyger." Jacket #11, 2000.
7-8
61

27

I loved being part of the North Beach phenomena but then I had to go
to work every morning, and got very stretched out, with late nights and
taking dexedrine which was the drug of choice then if you could get it.
So it got very stretched out for me during that time. But I needed to
earn a living. 63
Kyger, like the other beat women writers, arrived in a community of poets because she
was looking for a community of intellectuals. Unlike most of the beat chicks her
principal, initial entry in the poetry community in San Francisco was not a lover, but her
friend Jerome Mallman, a young painter friend happened to be a co-worker. (Bobbie
Lousie Hawkins, who was married to Robert Creeley for a time said, “I registered that if
you fucked somebody, you had somebody to talk to. An easy solution!”) 64

III. Poetics of the Rush
After Kyger moves to Japan, especially, her poetry practice itself becomes a way
of maintaining her independence. As I noted in the introduction to this project, she said
on a panel in 2000 that in Japan, she spent a lot of time “paying attention to the details of
daily life so they didn’t become the mundane thing of the quote housewife.” 65 This
manifests itself in the formal quality of the poems as well-Stephen Vincent is one the poets who works on Kyger in what I have termed the
‘second wave’ of Kyger scholarship. 66 In an essay titled Testing the Sublime, Vincent
explores the syntactical difficulty of Kyger’s poetry as it relates to this concept of “the
rush.”
What makes these poems contemporary, rather than histrionic: they are
nervous, publicly anxious, not always sure, and yet committed in a way
that proposes a generosity of humor and spirit, a mischievousness...
63

ibid., 10
“Women and the Beats Panel”
65 “Women and the Beats Panel”
66 For a more detailed discussion of this, see appendix I
64

28

Kyger’s work (clearly various in its directions) delivers a formality
constantly disrupted by a variety of scrims that move/ slide into and off
stage. The incomplete sentence that splices then unsplices from the
overlap of one scrim and then another. ”67
I spend some time with this because I want to borrow Vincent’s terminology as I go
forward. I appreciate Vincent’s description of some of Kyger’s favorite syntactical
maneuvers-- “formality constantly disrupted,” the “spicing” and “unsplicing” of
sentences. He says that Kyger “keeps turning the tables-- the unveiling-- providing the
poem as a “rush,” a surprise, indeed an alchemy.” Kyger’s observational poetry is so
faithful to perception (of the outer world, as well as her own thought) that often more
than a study of sight, these poems become studies of its limits and its lapses.
Consider About Now, a poem written in 2004-About now
tiny iridescent
pieces of abalone
So intimate these overcast days
Home is the moment
the quail arrive.
The sentences are fragmented, interrupting, constantly subverting our expectations. As
detail follows detail, perception and thought, Kyger’s syntax becomes mobile and multivalenced. It’s a rush-- maybe the same “rush,” that Kyger describes in Otis
Consciousness.
These poetics are anticipated by some of her work in The Tapestry and the Web.
Like Kyger’s observational poems, poems in that book they often avoid syntactical
closure just as much as Kyger herself avoids closure of her sight. Take, for instance,
“Fragmented, ie several valleys, which opens
67

Vincent, Stephen. "Testing the Sublime-- The Work of Joanne Kyger." Jacket #11,
2000, 3
29

Unfortunately unable to give you the plain D. can present of
wheat, corn etc.

only bravado on my part

to hope to be blessed with complete vision. 68

My project in the second half of this thesis is to trace the development of Kyger’s poetics
of “the rush” from early poems in The Tapestry and the Web (such as “Waiting” and
“Fragmented”) through her later observational poems. I hope that, through doing this,
what will emerge is a strong sense of the way that Kyger’s poetics are shaped by, and
shape, her social performances throughout her life. And, ultimately, move toward a
social and political reading of her work as a critique of or, antidote to, 1950s
“confinement culture.”
Part IV-- Reading The Tapestry and the Web and Kyger’s Observational Poetics
I. “The Rush” in Kyger’s Epic Poetics
It is by imagining through the story of Homer’s Penelope that Kyger first explores
issues of domestic confinement in her poetry. As she continues writing, using epic motifs
to articulate this project of articulating her own seeings seems to become a crutch.
December 31, 1963
... Resolutions: In order to rise as a poet, the craft of poetry must be
studied and known. Painful as it may be, hours each day should be spent
scanning poetry sheets and volumes of the past. New conscious ground
expansion for poems and ordinary proficiency both executed daily. The
craft should fit like a glove. Exactly: from my own life, not sources from
myth. 69

68
69

Kyger, Joanne. As Ever, 22
Kyger, Joanne.The Japan & India Journals, 269
30

Although she ultimately moves away from the epic poetics, they are crucial, I would
argue, to the development of her later work.
Penelope appears in her poetry first in The Maze. Her engagement with her begins
as an intervention in to literature, likely by the influence of Robert Duncan. 70 In a letter,
Kyger recalls that the ending of The Maze poem was inspired by a dream she had about
the character Miss Havisham in Great Expectations by Dickens. 71 The finished poem,
however doesn’t bear that mark. Considering earlier mentions of “Ulysses” in this poem,
the “She” here appears, from without to be Penelope, a figure who Kyger later establishes
as a classical analogue to herself as a ‘Beat Woman.’ “The Maze” ends,
She
tortures
the curtains of the window
shreds them
70

We might even read it as a participation in the project Duncan takes on in The H.D.
Book. The H.D. Book is a quest to explore the shadows of the culture he lived in. He
sees himself as an inheritor of the project of Freud, James, Sapir, Whorf, and others,
in reclaiming as “common sense” and as “meaningful and significant” the thought of
“primitives, dreamers, children, or the mad.” Duncan’s quest to extend the types of
human experiences thought of as human must have spoken particularly to Kyger, as
a woman. Duncan’s interest extended the project of Freud, James, et al. toward
reversing the dismissal of women and the feminine. Michael Boughn, who
introduces the The H.D. Book, calls it a project to recover what has been “occulted
beneath layers of patriarchal authority.”
Duncan, Robert The H.D. Book. Edited by Michael Boughn and Victor Coleman.
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press, 2011.
71

Kyger sees the two women as having been subject to the same plight of
repression. She writes-- “I had a dream Monday night: I was looking a the
white muslim curtain in my bedroom and I fell asleep. When I awoke Sheila
had gone mad-- like Pip’s ‘friend’ in Great Expectations, Mrs. Haversham-and had done awful things to the curtains. They were shredded in the most
terrifying way-- like loose spider webs and fastened with points of open
safety pins to the ceiling and walls around the window.”
Kyger, Joanne "Letters from Lost & Found." Harriet (Poetry Foundation Blog). Entry
posted August 31, 2012. http://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2012/08/lettersfrom-lost-found/
31

like some
insane insect
creates a
demented web
from the thin folds
her possessed fingers
clawing
she
thrusts them away with
sharp jabs of long pins to the walls. 72
Some scholarship has been done on Kyger’s re-imagining of Penelope. 73 In Parts and
Particulars, Linda Russo advocates for the political power of Kyger’s aim to uncover or
imagine an inner life on to Penelope through scenes like this one, which force us to
realize that the narrator of The Odyssey did not ask, of Penelope, “But what’s on her
mind?” as Kyger does. 74
This is all good. But, what I find most interesting about Kyger’s early epic poetics
is the way that, through her exploration of The Odyssey, Kyger begins to develop a
distinct way of thinking about the relationship of poetry to seeing. Recording her seeings
in poetry is a practice that keeps her engaged in the movement of her own life. In “The
Maze,” the “She’ who shreds the curtains of the windows is clearly distinct from the “I”
who walked through the maze in the dead governor’s garden. But the scenes speak to
each other. Both describe women who struggle with obstructions of their vision. In these
poems, seeing and composition often emerge together-- in “The Maze” Penelope/ Miss
Havisham opens the curtains not just by tearing, but weaving.
II. Waiting and Detail

72

Kyger, Joanne. As Ever, 45
I say imaging because Kyger makes it clear that this is her own reading, playfully
using language such as “Refresh my thoughts...” and “as I recall” and “I choose to
think of her...” see Kyger, Joanne. About Now, 67
74 Kyger, Joanne. As Ever, 35
73

32

When Kyger is writing “The Maze,” she does not have much direct experience as
being a “beat chick”-- pushing against the culture was as simple as getting out, opening
the windows, embracing possibility. But, as Kyger became more attached to Gary
Snyder, moving in to the East-West house in 1959 and to Japan the following year, her
living situation began to look more like Penelope’s. Snyder would often go on trips and
to sesshins without her. And she would be waiting at home for long periods of time.
Confronting this situation as a cheeky financially independent young woman, she wrote
things like,
I am no longer Gary Snyder’s sweet north beach chick because I said
Gary Snyder you must not be insanely in love with me if you are
always running off to the mountains and sitting cross legged zenly
and paying no attention to me for hours.... and telling me to read
more books instead of admiring my precious unspoiled mind. 75
She writes of Gary in this quippy way more than once in those early letters, calling him,
“wretchedly independent.” She writes, “I can see he is going to cause me a lot of misery/
or vice -versa.” 76 And, he does.
When Kyger and Gary move to Japan, Gary’s constant leaving finds her alone in
the house, knowing nearly no one. These intermittent isolations launch her into a
dialogue with The Odyssey which takes as its subject the nature of knowing. Can one
know what one has not seen? How much can we trust? We see her beginning to explore
that in The first of the Odyssey Poems-Oh he is a liar
from the bottom of his heart
But he puts facts together
and has
little rival, and lets no one know.
75

Alcalay, Ammiel, ed. "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne Kyger."
24
76 ibid., 22
33

The real earth
moves and falls away in to pieces in the north
He comes back, he was lead astray,
the land has abundance
corn and wine, rain
springs, the forest
wild fields of flowers take him out
with your own eyes you make sure. 77
“With your own eyes.” There is no other authority. Any account of what happens
beyond her is uncertain. Her own eyes are all she trusts. Engaging them is way of
remaining present to herself; a way of asserting the value of experiences (her own) which
the “domestic confinement” culture threatens to estrange her from.
This is where we begin to see these poetics anticipating Kyger’s observational
poetry. In interviews, after 1970 or so, Kyger writes that she sees poetry as a tool for
living an engaged life.78 By “congratulating” any living being in her poetry, she
“congratulates her own living.” 79 In an interview in 1974, she said of her writing
practice: “for me it gets into... I was going to say, adventure of the self, but maybe that’s
too particular, For me it’s always a process of just trying to keep pushing out the
horizon...”80 Kyger is talking about the way that poetry helps her feel that she is
expanding as person, and making spiritual and artistic progress. (Ultimately, freeing the
observations of her daily life from their dailiness-- but I will discuss this in more detail
later.) What’s important is that this “pushing out the horizon” always comes from a place

77

Kyger, Joanne. As Ever, 31
Lawrence, Nahem. "A Conversation with Joanne Kyger." Occident 8 (spring 1974):
142-57.
79 Kyger, Joanne. "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed."
80 (Occident interview page 154. That was 1974)
78

34

of phenomenal attention, as going downtown at night always began with washing her
hair. 81
In the hours that Kyger spends alone in the house waiting for Gary to return from
sesshins, it becomes necessary for Kyger to put in to practice what she theorized in “The
Maze.” Composition, such as weaving or writing, is a key to engaging, seeing, a push
away from a confined existence. Writing through the details of ones’ days changes it
from a confined, mundane experience to something other.
In Kyger’s observational poems, she clearly puts that in to practice. But, some of
the poems in The Tapestry and the Web anticipate that as well. “Waiting” is particularly
tender early example of this.
over the lilacs won’t he

come home

to at least rest tonightI want to see
the round car safe in the driveway, cinders
and the moon over head 82

81

Attention works as anecdote to futile over-intellectualizing and explains the movement
she makes away from the fading North Beach Scene at this time. 81 In 1959, she wrote in
a letter to Michael Rumaker,
I am glad that Ebbe can meet other poets and not have to suffer the
continuous smart talk that goes on between Spicer, George Stanley &
Duncan when he is around. That can be quite headachy and leads you out
onto the plains of a quite unreal world, as removed from feeling (ie. Jack
Spicer’s) as possible. However that is no longer a problem with me, my
meetings with the old While Rabbit crowd are infrequent and therefore
always pleasantries are exchanged.
Kyger has her own headiness/intellectuality, but she tends to stay away from the plains of
a quite unreal world.
Alcalay, Ammiel, ed. "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne Kyger."
82

Kyger, Joanne. As ever, 30
35

Writing here is not the subject, as it was in “The Maze.” But, in this poem we see the
writing and recording detail being used as an anchor to uncertainty. The careful attention
to visual detail in this poem works as a relief to the unknown of waiting. The massiveness
of what might lie “over the lilacs” is grounded by the specificity of the flower, the
driveway, and the cinders. There is security in recording detail. 83

III. “Those things we see are images of the past”
The development of “Waiting” is that, unlike in The first Odyssey poem in which
she writes from a “zoomed out” perspective, in “Waiting” she refrains from speaking
about things that she would not have directly experienced. (There is no way Kyger or
Penelope would have direct knowledge of “the real earth” of the north, or the abundance
of that land described in the first Odyssey poem. But she clearly would have been able to
see the lilacs of “Waiting,” and likely did.) In the later poems which follow from
“Waiting” Kyger is even less likely to occupy the “zoomed out” perspective she takes in
the first Odyssey poem.
Her admission of her own unknowing is tirelessly realistic. And is only
increasingly so as she grows as a poet. (In “The persimmons are falling,” she writes, “I
don’t know a thing, about what’s around the corner.’) 84 The position of her speaking “I”
never strays from herself, or “zooms out.” For that reason, “Waiting” predicts the close
83

The waiting space that she occupies could be much more volatile than it is. The
power of this poem lies in the contrast that we feel between the unknown of her
lover’s whereabouts and the specificity of the lilacs, the cinders, the moon.
84 ibid., 28
This is perhaps the opposite of the experience she had on her peyote trip of 1959, of
which she writes in visions of hell, another poem in Tapestry, “heaven explodes the
walls.”)
36

focus of Kyger’s observational poetry. With the exception of her occasional
philosophizing or references to myth, those poems refuse to reveal information Kyger did
not directly experience. Or, often, that Kyger is not directly experiencing.
By the time that Kyger is working on her observational poems, she takes very
seriously the practice of writing through detail, within the moment, only from her own
direct perceptions.
She says later in in an interview,
You pitch your tones environmentally to what’s around you... really,
amigo, ideas are a dime a dozen. Ideas are something our European
structure of mind which sucks in the world, which our education has given
us very generously. I don’t want that. I want to see how you live in your
environment or in your compassion for place. 85
What is so important here is her assertion that there can be no consciousness with out
context. When “you pitch your tones,” physicality comes in to it, necessarily. Engaging
that, your context, she writes, is more valuable than making an argument in a poem. It is
only by attention this close (and descriptions of it this true to her embodiment) that she is
able to liberate her daily seeings from those of the “quote housewife.”

IV. Poem as Statement for Now
The question remains, however, why does this allegiance to detail so often
manifest in the poems as a rush? Do the breaks in logic, the revelation of unknowing,
these the “splicing” and “unsplicing” of incomplete sentences which poem that feeling of
“the rush” contribute to this project? 86

85
86

Kyger, Joanne. "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed." 117-8
Vincent, Stephen "Testing the Sublime-- The Work of Joanne Kyger." 3
37

I’d argue they do-- I want to turn to “Those Things we See are Images Of the
Past,” another poem published in The Tapestry and the Web. Kyger ostensibly begins
writing “Those Things We See are Images of the Past” in San Francisco in 1958-- we see
seeds of her interest in these topics in her 1958 Duncan Workshop notebook (such as the
mention of the head turning in “As if To Meet.”)87 And, I have reason to believe that she
completes in Japan, sometime after 1960. In it, the indispensability of phenomenal
perception, the insistence that one, or you, “with your own eyes make sure”-- is
articulated more precisely. At the same time, in it, she also begins to explore formal
principles that give her poems the feeling of “the rush.”
In “Those things we see are images of the past,” Kyger expresses that her anxiety
about “what’s around the corner” is more complicated than it seems. Kyger draws a
parallel between literal blockages of her sight, such as “walls,” and more abstract
blockages-- like her confinement to the present. 88 In “those things,” she writes, we are
“From now, always, on the turning point, viewing back.” And, the past we look back on

87

See Appendix IV
We might read this as an extension of the project Duncan articulates in Rites of
Participation, a chapter in the H.D. Book, Duncan writes,
“Time in the composition comes now,” Gertrude Stein puts it, “and this is
what is troubling everyone the time in the composition is now a part of
distribution and equilibration”-- “past the danger point”-- throughout
history of Man. History itself, no longer kept within the boundaries of
periods or nations, appears a mobile structure in which events may move
in time in ever-changing constellations.” ... The whole is seen as a mobile
is passionate impermanence in which Time and Eternity are revealed as
one.
For Kyger, the past is a mobile structure like the one Duncan derives from his
reading of Stein. But, these “ever changing constellations” are not just limited to the
past encountered through the composition. The composition does not even come in
to it. (I think about the dead bird of The Maze, uncovered and prehistoric.)
88

38

is “An entirely new thing each time” each time we turn. 89 Not only is the past a mystery,
but the future, too-- When Kyger writes,
Right to the water’s edge
That’s a wall
She is talking about the onset of event. In Kyger’s poetry, the waves often appear as a
metaphor for “rushes of arrivals.”90 They are described in this poem as “full of things to
happen.”
What we see is Kyger describing for herself what she calls “the gasp of reality” in
an earlier poem, and in a later one, the “lucid suspension” of the present. 91 The moment
in which she might know her own life is so fleeting. I would argue that the formal
principles Stephen Vincent articulates as central in Kyger’s poems-- the overlapping of
“scrims” of attention; the “splicing” and “unsplicing” of incomplete sentences-- are all
strategies that she takes for keeping the poem within that space of “the gasp of the
present.” 92
Joanne Kyger is described by Alicia Ostriker as “a genius, but a strange one... a
porcupine travelling at the speed of light.” That is not a bad measure. Though she
struggles with the passage of time, her strategy is not to dwell in detail in order to draw
out the depth of a moment. Kyger’s poetry is interested in detail in so far as it is true to
the nature of human perception. She notates sight after sight, and allows us to move with
her as she follows the ever-receding “gasp of the present. She writes in her journals,

89

In her Duncan poetry workshop notebook, she writes in big red block letters she
writes, “WE NEVER START AGAIN / ONLY / REMEMBER AGAIN.” (see appendix.)
90 Kyger, Joanne. About Now, 195
91 Kyger, Joanne. "Notebook: Duncan Poetry Workshop 1958-1959."
92 Vincent, Stephen, Testing the Sublime, 3
39

Suggest and suggest and keep turning... The surprise is innocence &
revelation of the mind...
Poem as statement for now.
Pound is so much better than I
to indulge in
emotion 93
In Tapestry, Kyger is writing “Poem as statement for now,” at the same time that she
finds herself often chasing the now. “HOW CLEVER,” she says, sarcastically, to indulge
in memory or invention. “Those things we see” begins,
From now on, always, on the turning point, viewing back
and that delicious interpretation
is the world, HOW CLEVER OF US
A more clear, but perhaps less delicious iteration of the thought expressed at the
beginning of “Those things we see” is recorded in her journals:
5.18.60
All the world’s a stage & we are
actors in it: a real existentialist
statement, i.e. we have MADE UP the world
& I will not deny that I am sick with
the realization of it.
Any attempt to faithfully render a moment by dwelling in it would involve a set of
theatrics that she is not interested in. Kyger makes fun of facts. They are inventions; not
something she has time for. Kyger’s project, as we recall, is not to lose sight of the
present, but reclaim her consciousness-- gnarly or incomplete as it might be-- for herself
in a culture which seeks to render “adaptable” that kind of deep feeling. Toward this end,
it is more useful for her to keep turning-- to keep chasing the present in a “rush” even if

93

Kyger, Joanne. Japan and India Journals, 229
40

that is happening too quickly to follow well. The solution is simply to abandon hope of
being “clever.” Gaps in argument or continuity will be. The important thing is to stay true
to the movement. Kyger writes in a notebook,
I want to write a poem for birds
their movement
in to the poem 94
She treats her thoughts with the same kind of energy. Argument and indulgence of
emotion facilitate the false extension of a present. They get one stuck. In the spirit of
writing poems for birds, more than half of the utterances in “Those things we see” are
fragments. Thoughts and perceptions follow without opaquely. Her syntax avoids
closure. She desires openness at the level of syntax as much as at the level of sight. All
of those sentences that invite sense-making according to traditional syntactical logic the
describe unknowing, distance, lack of clarity, or things slipping away. These sentences
are “oh where does it go,” “she’s fleet footed,” “That’s a wall,” “do you talk to each other
well?” and “I miss each time.”
By avoiding argument, or indulgence in emotion, Kyger brings herself back in to
this principle that there can be no consciousness without context-- a principle that
harkens back to her days playing “the muse.” (As I discussed in parts one and two, when
Kyger was living in San Francisco, attention to physicality-- to things like hair-washing
and dress-- became an important “opening” to the artistic/intellectual community.)
Rooting on to context, attempting to stay close to the drifting present, is a project
that that Kyger continues all the way through to the end of her career. I’d like to return to
“About Now,” one of Kyger’s late observational poems. She wrote it in 2004. It ends,

94

Kyger, Joanne. "Notebook: Duncan Poetry Workshop 1958-1959." See appendix.
41

About now
tiny iridescent
pieces of abalone
So intimate these overcast days
Home is the moment
the quail arrive.
Even here, in a poem written long after rhetoric of confinement has dissipated from the
culture, we see her working in this project to push against it. The poem is part of an
embodied search for “the rush.” The syntactical ambiguity and distractibility, the
“splicing” and “unsplicing” of fragments gives us a realistic map of her attentions. The
valence of her description “So intimate” at the center is unclear. The adjective works as a
pivot. It might refer to the iridescent shell of a mollusk, or describe the feeling of an
overcast day. In the end, that doesn’t matter. “It is memory.” And she’s off to the next
perception.
This calls to mind a poem I studied earlier in this project, “When I used to focus
on the worries, everybody”-It is memory. As I search to find
this day’s sweet drifting. The fog out to sea, the wind. 95
At the end of About Now and When I used to focus, both, we are left with sense that the
individual finds home through speaking, in place and in time. Home is not a place but a
moment followed and, ultimately, lost. But there is another. “Confinement,” to a home is
an illusion and impossibility for Kyger when she is able to recognize the passing
moment. Tracing it, she finds a freedom from inertia, brief clarity in waiting. In another
poem, she writes,

95

Kyger, Joanne. As ever, 206
42

Could be

anywhere

on Earth

and Time

focused completely

focused
on chopping
the tomatoes, chilies, and onions.96

96

Kyger, Joanne. About Now, 698
43

Conclusion
In this project, I’ve attempted to make a social and political reading of Kyger’s
observational poems more available by establishing how deeply social performance
impacted her poetic practice.
In the first half, I demonstrated how Kyger’s time playing the “muse” wasn’t
wasted, but prompted her to think about the role of the body in “The Maze,” and in other
early poems. In the second half, I attempted to illustrate how Kyger continued to explore
the relationship of poetry to social performance through the poems she wrote in Japan,
and how that exploration lead to a powerful repudiation of 1950s “confinement culture”
in her observational poems.
It is my hope that this project might serve as an intervention in to the body of
criticism on The Tapestry and The Web in particular. Kyger’s early writing is often
arbitrarily divided by in to two parts by critics: one which explores epic motifs, and a
second which is interested in a “poetics of presence.” (The “poetics of presence”
correlates roughly to her observational and proto-observational poems.) I attribute this
trend in the scholarship to very first piece of literary scholarship which discussed Kyger,
Michael Davidson’s influential San Francisco Renaissance book. This is an important
book, really the book on this period of literary history. It is cited in nearly every print
article on Kyger. The criticisms made there have dramatically shaped the discourse which
emerged around her work.
Davidson himself divides her body of work, preferring those poems in which,
“underlying [her] poetics of immediacy are mythopoeic and theological concerns that
serve to ground the present in a larger narrative.” 97 According to Davidson, poems like

97

ibid.
44

“It is lonely,” or “The persimmons are falling,” -- poems which, as I have argued,
anticipate the observational poems of her later years-- too often “indulge distractedness
for its own sake, becoming lists of unrelated observations, valued for their sheer presence
rather than for any relation to a conceptual or critical frame.” 98
It’s true that Kyger’s feminist “revisions” of the Odyssey are, by virtue of their
opaque engagement to Homer, more accessible to intellectual discourse. And, it is also
true that some of Kyger’s poems indulge distractedness for its own sake. But, I think I
have made steps in this project toward demonstrating that these two projects hold
together. (And are, in fact, bolstered by one another.)
I believe that this division might be part of the reason why no statement has yet
been made on the political import of Kyger’s “observational poems.” While Kyger’s
“epic poetry” of The Tapestry and the Web, and the equally opaque Descartes and the
Splendor of, a long prose poem in Places to Go, have been given thorough treatment by
literary scholars, the observational poems have yet to see that honor. This is not to say
that they have not been written about-- the observational poems, and the poems in
Tapestry which anticipate them, have been read principally by poets. Many articles by
poets have been dedicated to their study. (Notley, Alcalay, and Schelling, cited in the
introduction, as well as Stephen Vincent, all belong to this movement.) I have nothing
against the work of these poet-critics, but I do wish very much that a space could be
made, in some venue, for a rigorous historical study of Kyger’s later work and the poems
in Tapestry which anticipate it. I hope my work here might provide grounds for that.

98

Davidson, Michael. "The San Francisco Renaissance." In The Cambridge Companion
to American Poetry Since 1945, edited by Jennifer Ashton. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2012,188
Note: I have written extensively on this matter in Appendix I.
45

46

APPENDIX I: NOTES ON KYGER SCHOLARSHIP
This project responds to what I perceive as a division in the scholarship which
corresponds to a (false) division of Kyger’s first book of poetry, The Tapestry and the
Web established by Michael Davidson in his San Francisco Renaissance Poetry book.
The division is more or less chronological-- there are two waves, roughly divided
by Kyger’s feature in Jacket Magazine, which ostensibly opened up the critical discourse
on her work to those aspects of Tapestry (and her later poems) which were not praised by
Davidson. This is a short overview of those two ‘waves’ of scholarship. All of the books
mentioned here are listed in my bibliography.
1990- 2000
The first movement in the scholarship, which spans from 1990 to 2000 or so, is interested
in studying the parts of Kyger’s work that Davidson celebrated-- her ideas about her
gender and her poems which reach out explicitly toward a critical framework. (The
Odyssey Poems in Tapestry.)
In the 1990’s, several anthologies dedicated to the purpose of ‘recovering’ the
work of women writers from the Beat generation such as Jan Kerouac, Carolyn Cassady,
Elise Cowen, etc. were published. In the early 2000’s, a book of interviews with women
writers from that generation, Breaking the Rule of Cool by Nancy Grace, was published,
as well as one book of criticism titled Girls Who Wore Black, also edited by Nancy
Grace. Kyger is featured in many of these anthologies of women’s writing.
In these early anthologies, “Tapestry” and “Pan as the Son of Penelope” are the
poems of Kyger’s which receive the most attention. “Tapestry,” which was surprisingly
Kyger’s first published poem, was anthologized in The Beat Book edited by Ann

47

Waldman, Beat Down To Your Soul edited by Ann Charters, and A Different Beat edited
by Richard Peabody. That is, it appears in four of the seven anthologies I find that include
her work.
“Tapestry” and “Pan as the Son of Penelope” are studied in depth by Linda Russo
in Girls Who Wore Black (2002), and more cursorily both in the introduction to Places to
Go, the chapter on Kyger in Beat Down to Your Soul edited by Nancy Grace (2001), and
in Michael Davison’s The San Francisco Renaissance.
2000- 2015
I argue that a feature in the online poetics magazine, Jacket opened up Kyger scholarship
to a whole new areas of study-- the journal, her relationship to the east, her interest in
phenomenology, and her poetics of presence. (The Jacket feature was published in April,
2000). It might have even prompted the publication of As Ever, her selected poems.
(2002)
Following the Jacket Magazine feature, and especially since the publication of her
collected works in 2007, Kyger’s later works are beginning to be studied in academic,
book-form scholarship. In Philosophy of the Beats (2012) Jane Falk sreads Kyger’s
experimental TV show/poem ‘Descartes and the Splendor Of,’ published in Going On, as
a philosophical and feminist statement.
Likewise, as the field of Beat studies grows and the voices of other marginalized
figures emerge and the Beat period is less often read as a monotextural “male revolt,”
Kyger’s own story comes out clearer. 99

99

“The male revolt” is a term that I borrow from Barbara Ehenrich’s The Hearts of
Men.
48

Particularly influential has been the recent rise in interest in Phillip Whalen, who
Kyger describes as “the best of the beat poets” in at letter to Michael Rumaker. 100 Two
takes on Japan (2012) reads Kyger’s Japan and India Journals alongside Philip
Whalen’s travel poems, opening up a new reading of her time there. And, particularly
brilliant, Linda Russo’s How You Want to Be Styled (2013), reads Kyger’s
correspondence Phillip Whalen (who Alice Notley describe as a “male-female poet”) in
the in order to complicate our understanding of gender and social performance in the Beat
era, as well as re-write the story of Kyger’s own emergence as a woman poet that Russo
herself told in To Deal with Parts and Particulars: Joanne Kyger’s Early Epic Poetics”
(2002).
Kyger’s work has also gained traction in poetics circles-- her work was celebrated
at length in Coming After by Alice Notley (2005), and in the blogosphere. My personal
favorite is Jennifer Nix’s "Finding Poetry in Illness,” published through The Poetry
Foundation in 2012.
What is more-- since the publication of About Now, these circles have begun to
call upon Kyger’s own voice more frequently to comment upon the work of her
predecessors and contemporaries. Kyger wrote for the Jacket Magazine feature on Ann
Waldman (April 2005), and a book on the life of Richard Brautigan. She was also
commissioned to write three pieces for the Poetry foundation website in 2012. Especially
interesting is her take on The Curriculum of the Soul series, the set of books Olson
commissioned. Some of her correspondence has been published by the CUNY Lost &
Found series, and even as Kyger ceases to publish new work at the rate she once did,

100

Alcalay, Ammiel, ed. "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne Kyger."
49

interviews with her have increased. These concern themselves with her life in Bolinas
and her later poetry.
Conclusion
All of this is good news for Kyger scholarship. Progress is being made toward a more
holistic vision of Kyger’s contribution to American poetry. Scholars have begun to look
at her from fresh angles, draw attention to, and make available her work which does not
opaquely engage a critical framework (i.e., Homer). But, I think that the effect of
Davidson’s criticism still lingers in the work. With the exception, perhaps, of the very
most recent study of her work, "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne
Kyger,” Kyger’s “poetics of presence” remain untouched in studies of her early work. A
holistic vision of the Tapestry and the Web has yet to emerge. The goal of this project is
to make steps toward that.

50

APPENDIX II: PARTIAL TIMELINE OF KYGER’S LIFE, THROUGH 1970
1934: Kyger is Born in Vallejo, California. Kyger’s father is a Navy Officer. The family
lived in China, Washington, Florida, Pennsylvania and Illinois.
1949: Kyger family settles in Santa Barbara, CA.
1952-1956: Kyger attends UC Santa Barbara, where she studied Heidegger and
Wittgenstein, got a D in Hugh Kenner’s freshman English class, and wrote articles for the
school paper. 101
1957: Kyger moves to San Francisco with her friend Nemi Frost.

102

In her biography of Robert Duncan, Lisa Jarnot describes this time in Kyger’s life this
way, “Joanne Kyger, who had fled college in Santa Barbara hoping to encounter likeminded young people in SF remembered that her first education in poetry came through
those magazines, copies of which disappeared from her apartment when friends visited.”
103

1958: Kyger is living with John Wieners and attending Duncan’s poetry workshop.
In the fall, Kyger presented her first “important poem” to the Spicer-Duncan circe. It is
called “The Maze”
In February, Kyger tries peyote with Gary Snyder while recuperating from a broken
ankle. She says, “It ripped the Christianity right off my back. I saw this wild boar that I
took as my totem animal and I followed it through India and in to the Eleusinian
mysteries.” She later writes about this experience in a poem visions of heaven & hell. The
Wild Boar also appears in some of The Odyssey Poems. 104
1959: Kyger called this “a year which was the equivalent of a nervous breakdown.” 105
101

Kyger, Joanne, "JOANNE KYGER interviewed 9/29/95 in her Bolinas Home." By
David Chadwick. Crooked Cucumber: the Life and Zen Teaching of Shunruyu
Suzuki. Last modified September 29, 1995.
http://www.cuke.com/Cucumber%20Project/interviews/kyger.html. 6
102 Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger." Places to Go: Joanne Kyger to Breaking
the Rule of Cool, edited by Nacy Grace. Jackson: University Press of Missisippi,
2004.
103 Jarnot, Lisa. Robert Duncan The Ambassador from Venus: A Biography. London:
University of California Press, 2012, 29
104 Berkson, Bill. "Joanne Kyger." In The Beats: Literary Bohemians in Postwar
America, edited by Ann Charters, 324-28. Vol. 1. N.p.: Gale Research Company,
1983, 326
There are also very vivid Description of this in “congratulatory poetics”, and in the
CUNY Lost and Found recovered letters.
105 Kyger, Joanne "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed." 114
51

In March, Kyger gives her first public reading at the Beer & Wine Mission. (It was
arranged by Spicer.) Around the same time, she publishes Tapestry in the 4th issue of Jack
Spicer’s J Magazine. It is her first published poem. She said, “the world changed. I
thought people on the street looked at me differently.” 106
Kyger moves in to the East-West house, where she develops relationships with Bill
McNeill, Phillip Whalen, and Gary Synder. Shunruyu Suzuki teaches her how to sit. She
describes it this way:
“I was living at the east west house and was getting ready to go to Japan so I thought I
had to learn how to sit... There was a real focus on the Zen of enlightenment, koan all that
stuff that was going on in the late fifties. Some kind of open door to whatever it was
supposed to be-- realization. We were reading all those silly books of DT suzuki and here
was a guy who really showed us how to sit.” 107
1960: Kyger marries Gary Snyder and travels with him to Japan. She met Ginsberg &
Orlovsky on the trip.108
There, she teaches English and does some acting. 109 There she writes her Japan and India
Journals. She says that she models her Journal writing after Gary’s practice. (he kept a
“daily book” ) .110
Her Zen practice does not quite take off there, as she expected it to. “Of course he [Gary]
was very strict in his Zen study and it seemed inaccessible to me. I didn’t speak Japanese,
I was a woman, there was such formality inside the sodo you couldn’t just drop in and out
and it was a very strict kind of sitting.” 111
1964: Kyger returns from Japan. She divorces Snyder. “It took me until I was about 30
before poetry became an identity I was within. Before that it was my own longings for
it.” 112
She does not resume sitting, though she regrets it.
This was the Open Space year. Stan Persky (a bartender at Anxious Asp) turned on Don
Allen and put together a parody of new American Poetry, an anthology which had

106

Russo, Linda "To Deal with Parts and Particulars: Joanne Kyger’s Early Epic
Poetics." 187
107 Kyger, Joanne, "JOANNE KYGER interviewed 9/29/95 in her Bolinas Home." 2
108 Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger." 145
109 Kyger, Joanne "Anne Waldman: The Early Years... 1965-1970."
110 Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger." 145
111 Kyger, Joanne, "JOANNE KYGER interviewed 9/29/95 in her Bolinas Home." 4
112 Berkson, Bill. "Joanne Kyger." 327
52

excluded Kyger. Kyger says, there were these “wars” that were going on between the
poets in San Francisco at that time. 113
1965: Don Allen Publishes The Tapestry & The Web
Kyger reads at the Berkeley Poetry Conference.
1966: Kyger marries the painter Jack Boyce on valentines day. 114 They travel in Spain,
France, Italy and England for nine months. The trip nourishes her interests in art and
philosophy. 115
Kyger teaches English in New York. 116 She meets Anne Waldman, who she describes as
being the first woman she “really meets” in her generation who is devoted to writing.
(She only knew of DiPrima, Levertrov, Ruth Weiss.) 117 Kyger spends a lot of time at St.
Mark’s place.
1967: Kyger moves from New York to San Francisco and begins to work at KQED for
the artists in television series. 118
1969: Kyger and Boyce move to Bolinas. 119
Kyger describes Bolinas :
“Bolinas offered an alterative lifestyle, one that was sought at that time in the late 60 and
early 70s. A small coastal town of about 500 inhabitants at the time, it offered rural
living, the hippies versus the surfers for softball teams, ad in large letters painted on the
sea wall NEW YORK REFUGEES GO HOME... the picture of those years have
everyone sitting on the ground, shoulder high long grass and long hair. On Indian print
bedspreads. We could sit all afternoon with bottles of wine and smokes, and conversation
and poetry, moving along with the path of the sun. Nobody sits on the ground anymore.
Bolinas was a destination point.”

113

Russo, Linda "Introduction: a context for reading Joanne Kyger."
Berkson, Bill. "Joanne Kyger." 327
115 ibid.
116 Kyger, Joanne "Anne Waldman: The Early Years... 1965-1970."
117 Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger."
118 Opstedal, Kevin. Dreaming as One: Poetry, Poets and Community in Bolinas,
California 1967-1980.. chapter 2
119 ibid.
114

53

APPENDIX III: A SELECTION OF POEMS READ
IN THIS PROJECT
When I used to focus on the worries, everybody
When I used to focus n the worries, everybody
was ahead of me, I was the bottom
of the totem pole
a largely spread squat animal
How about a quick massage now, he said to me.
I don’t think it’s cool, I replied.
Oh, said he, after a pause, I should have waited
for you to ask me.
The waves came in closer and closer.
When I fall into the gap of suspicion I am no longer here.
In this world that has got closed over by houses
and networks, I fly out
from under the belly.
Life’s dizzy crown
of whirling lights, circles this head.
Pure
with wonder, hot
with wonder. The streets become golden.
All
size increases, the colors glow, we are in myth.
We are in easy understanding.
Scarcely talking, thoughts pass between us.
It is memory. As I search to find
this days’ sweet drifting.
The fog out to sea, the wind. 120

120

About Now, 296
54

The Maze
I saw the
dead bird on the sidewalk
his neck uncovered
and prehistoric
At seven in the morning
my hair was bound
against the fish in the air
who begged for the ocean
I longed for their place
Behind the
tall thin muslin of the curtain
we could see his shadow
knocking
and we waited
not stirring
crouched by the fireplace
where the ashes blew out
later we checked the harbor
to see if it was safe
rather hoping
one had gone astray
and flung itself upon the shore
for all to watch
If I should weep
they would never know
and so I walked
silently
shrugging off hands
in treacherous places
wanting to fall
In Williamsburg, Virginia
my uncle
pointed out the Maze
which grew
in the dead
governor’s garden
delighted

55

I went to it
and stood
poised
inside the
precise
entrance
like a long hallway
the tightly trimmed
bushes
held themselves
pointing each
leaf
and twig
in an unquestioning manner
white gravel
caressed my feet
the sky disappeared
and I
could hear
the sounds of water
rushing
I knew each corner
without pausing
Held captive in a cave
Ulysses
sobbed for his wife
who was signing high
melodies
from the center of a
cobweb shawl
of their design
three feathers
I picked
from a stone
in my path
and turning last
I saw
the speckled bench

56

and halting fountain
which marked
the end.
She
tortures
the curtains of the window
shreds them
like some
insane insect
creates a
demented web
from the thin folds
her possessed fingers
clawing
she
thrusts them away with
sharp jabs
of long pins
to the walls. 121

121

As ever, 45
57

Those things we see are images of the Past
From now on, always, on the turning point, viewing back
and that delicious interpretation
is the world, HOW CLEVER OF US
An entirely new thing each time
blind or not about it, always inventive-- seeing
stones
persimmons,
moving a stone in dirt, oh where does it go
she’s fleet footed
to be a tree, to be Jack Spicer in a dream
to carry this around all day. and every night
the waves chuck full of things to happen
As clear as you can See
it’s done, isn’t it, isn’t that a fact.

Right to the water’s edge.
That’s a wall.
Do you talk to each other well?
I miss each time. up she went her arms went into willow
And do you feel
what you put down is fine, precious.

58

Tuesday, October 28, 1969
It was a beautiful golden day
Now a black split shape
scuttles under
de foot. So long, Sayonara.
The fact cat lies down
dozing. I could use a little rest too
I only slept 11 hours last night,
wrote some letters, swept the floor,
planted 2 rows of onions, snow peas
And now I am looking forward
to washing my hair. 122

122

About Now, 186
59

from Joanne
he makes love to her
he talks about
afterwards
when some years
ago
he worked
for the welfare
department
in New York City
She starts up
a hue
and cry
oh the money, the electricity
give me
some clothes, some jewels
some food, some love
In the corner
don’t you worry
The tunes, familiar
weeping & laughing
I leave my love behind
what I wanted to say
was in the broad
sweeping
form of being there
I am walking up the path
I come home and wash my hair
I am bereft
I dissolve quickly
I am everybody 123

123

About Now, 211
60

APPENDIX IV: FIGURES

Fig. 1, page from Kyger’s notebook dated February 14, 1959, when Kyger was suffering
from a broken ankle

61

Fig. 2, Page from Notebook dated 12/13/1958

62

Fig. 3, Poem from Notebook dated 12/16/58

63

Bibliography
Alcalay, Ammiel, ed. "Communication is Essential: Letters to & From Joanne Kyger."
The CUNY Poetics Documents Initiative, 3rd ser., 7 (Fall 2012).
Alexander, W. "Timeline: A Spicer Chronology." Jacket Magazine. Last modified 1999.
http://jacketmagazine.com/07/spicer-chron.html.
Allen, Donald, ed. The New American Poetry. New York: Evergreen Books, 1960.
Allen, Donald, and Warren Tallman, eds. Poetics of the New American Poetry. New
York: Grove Press, 1973.
Aram, Saroyan. Bolinas Book. N.p.: Other Publications, 1974.
Berkson, Bill. "Joanne Kyger." In The Beats: Literary Bohemians in Postwar America,
edited by Ann Charters, 324-28. Vol. 1. N.p.: Gale Research Company, 1983.
Berrigan, Ted. "Words for Joanne Kyger." Iowa Review 3, no. 4 (Fall 1972).
Brainard, Joe. The Collected Writings of Joe Brainard. Library of America. 2012.
Charters, Ann, ed. Beat down to your soul: what was the Beat Generation? New York:
Penguin, 2001.
Coffrey, Dan. "My phenomenology waits: Death and Rebirth in Joanne Kyger's
Phenomenological." Jacket Magazine, no. 11 (April 2000).
Damon, Maria. "Beat Poetry: HeavenHell USA, 1946-1965." In The Cambridge
Companion to Modern American Poetry, edited by Walter Kalaidjian, 167-79.
N.p.: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Davidson, Michael. "The San Francisco Renaissance." In The Cambridge Companion to
American Poetry Since 1945, edited by Jennifer Ashton. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2012.
———. The San Francisco Renaissance: Poetics and Community at Mid-Century.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Duncan, Robert. As Testimony: The Poet and the Scene. San Francisco, CA: White
Rabbit Press, 1964.
———. The H.D. Book. Edited by Michael Boughn and Victor Coleman. Berkeley and
Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press, 2011.
———. The Opening of the Field. N.p.: New Directions, 1960.

64

Ellingham, Lewis, and Kevin Killian. Poet Be Like God: Jack Spicer and the San
Francisco Renaissance. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press, 1998.
Falk, Jane. "Joanne Kyger 'Descartes and the Splendor Of': Bridging Dualisms through
Collaboration and Experimentation." In The Philosophy of the Beats, edited by
Sharin N. Elkholy. N.p.: University Press of Kentucky, 2012.
———. "Journal as Genre and Published Text: Beat Avant-Garde Writing Practices."
University of Toronto Quarterly 73, no. 4 (2004).
———. "Two Takes on Japan: Joanne Kyger's The Japan and India Journals and Philip
Whalen's Scenes of Life at the Capital." In The Transnational Beat Generation,
edited by Nancy M. Grace and Jennie Skerl. NY, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.
Frazer, Vernon, and Kirpal Gordon. "Who We Are Now: A Retrospective of Michael
Rothenberg." Jacket Magazine 33 (July 2007).
Friedman, Amy. "Joanne Kyger, Beat Generation poet: 'a porcupine travelling at the
speed of light.'" In Reconstructing the Beats, edited by Jennie Skerl, 73-88. New
York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2004.
“GEORGE STANLEY.” Poetry Society of America.
https://www.poetrysociety.org/psa/awards/frost_and_shelley/shelley_winners/200
6/
Gizzi, Peter, and Kevin Killian, eds. My Vocabulary Did This To Me: The Collected
Poetry of Jack Spicer. Wesleyan: Wesleyan University Press, 2008.
Gonzales, Matilde Martin. "Gender Politics and the Making of Anthologies: Towards a
Theory of Women's Poetry." American Poetry, 2006.
Grace, Nancy. "Places to Go: Joanne Kyger." Places to Go: Joanne Kyger to Breaking the
Rule of Cool, edited by Nacy Grace. Jackson: University Press of Missisippi,
2004.
———. "Snapshots, Sand Paintings and Celluloid: Formal Considerations in the Life
Writing of Women Writers from the Beat Generation." In Girls Who Wore Black:
Women Writing the Beat Generation, edited by Nancy Grace and Ronna Johnson.
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2002.
Hedley, Jane. "Making 'You' to find 'Me.'" Introduction to I Made You to Find Me: The
Coming of Age of the Woman Poet and the Politics of Poetic Address, 1-25.
Columbus, Oh: The Ohio State University Press, 2009.
Higdon, Hailey, ed. Joanne Kyger. EPC Buffalo. Last modified June 2011.
http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/kyger/.

65

Homans, Margaret. Women Writers and Poetic Identity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1980.
Jaffer, Frances. “For Women Poets, For Poetry: A Journal Entry.” In The Poetry
Reading: A Contemporary Compendium on Language & Performance, ed.
Stephen Vincent and Ellen Zweig. San Francisco: Momo’s Press 1981.
Jarnot, Lisa. Robert Duncan The Ambassador from Venus: A Biography. London:
University of California Press, 2012.
Johnson, Ronna. "Three Generations of Beat Poetics." In The Cambridge companion to
American poetry since 1945., by Jennifer Ashton. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2012.
Johnston, Alastair. A Rogue's Gallery of Literary and Artistic Types. 2004.
http://www.poltroonpress.com/rogues.html.
Juhasz, Suzanne. Naked and Fiery Forms: Modern American Poetry by Women, A New
Tradition. New York: Octagon Books, 1978.
Kane, Daniel. "Angel Hair Magazine, the Second-Generation New York School, and the
Poetics of Sociability." Contemporary Literature 45, no. 2 (2004).
Killian, Kevin. "The Carola Letters of Joanne Kyger and George Stanley." Jacket #11,
2000.
Knight, Brenda, ed. Women of the Beat Generation: The Writers, Artists, and Muses at
the Heart of a Revolution. California: Conari Press, 1996.
Kyger, Joanne. "Notebook: Duncan Poetry Workshop 1958-1959." 1958. Box 19: Folder
6. Joanne Kyger Papers, 1950 - 2009. University of California: San Diego, San
Diego, CA.
--------. About Now: Collected Poems. N.p.: National Poetry Foundation, 2007.
———. "ANDREW SCHELLING WITH JOANNE KYGER." Interview by Andrew
Schelling. The Conversant. Last modified September 2011.
http://theconversant.org/?p=6975.
———. "Anne Waldman: The Early Years... 1965-1970." Jacket Magazine 27 (April
2005).
———. As Ever: Selected Poems. Edited by Michael Rothenberg. New York: Penguin,
2002.

66

———. "The Community of THE CURRICULUM OF THE SOUL." Harriet (Poetry
Foundation Blog). Entry posted August 28, 2012. http://The Community of THE
CURRICULUM OF THE SOUL.
———. "Congratulatory Poetics: Joanne Kyger Interviewed." By Diane MiddletonMcQuaid and John Thorpe. Convivio 1, no. 1 (1983).
———. "Exciting and Simple: Lew Welch, William Carlos Williams, and Gertrude
Stein." Harriet (Poetry Foundation Blog). Entry posted August 6, 2012.
http://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2012/08/exciting-and-simple-lew-welchwilliam-carlos-williams-and-gertrude-stein/.
———. "from Joanne Kyger." The Electronic Poetry Center.
http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/kyger/autobiography.html.
Originally Published in ContemporaryAuthors Autobiography Series, Volume 16
———. The Japan & India Journals 1960-1964. Bolinas, CA: Tombouctou Press, 1981.
———. "Joanne Kyger and Simon Pettet in Conversation." Interview by Simon Pettet.
The Argotist Online. http://www.argotistonline.co.uk/Kyger%20interview.htm.
———. "JOANNE KYGER interviewed 9/29/95 in her Bolinas Home." By David
Chadwick. Crooked Cucumber: the Life and Zen Teaching of Shunruyu Suzuki.
Last modified September 29, 1995.
http://www.cuke.com/Cucumber%20Project/interviews/kyger.html.
———. "Letters from Lost & Found." Harriet (Poetry Foundation Blog). Entry posted
August 31, 2012. http://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2012/08/letters-fromlost-found/.
———. "Richard Brautigan." Harriet (Poetry Foundation Blog). Entry posted August 9,
2012. http://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2012/08/richard-brautigan/.
Kyger, Joanne, and Michael Rothenberg. Man-Women. N.p.: Big Bridge Press, 1988.
Lawrence, Nahem. "A Conversation with Joanne Kyger." Occident 8 (spring 1974): 14257.
Martz, Louis L., ed. H.D. Collected Poems 1912-1944. New York: New Directions,
1983.
May, Elaine Tyler. Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era. N.p.:
Basic Books, 2008.
"Memory Stick." mp3 audio file, 1:14. Penn Sound. Accessed April 27, 2015.
http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Kyger.php.

67

Nix, Jennifer. "Finding Poetry in Illness." The Poetry Foundation. Last modified May 9,
2012. http://www.poetryfoundation.org/article/243994.
Notley, Alice. "American Poetic Music at the Moment." In Coming After, 131-46. N.p.:
University of Michigan Press, 2005.
Notley, Alice. “Doctor Williams’ Heiresses: a Lecture.” Tuumba Press, 1980.
———. "Joanne Kyger's Poetry." In Coming After. N.p.: University of Michigan Press,
n.d.
———. "Voice." In Coming After, 147-57. N.p.: University of Michigan Press, 2005.
Olson, Charles. Muthologos: Lectures and Interviews. Edited by Raph Maud. 2nd ed.
N.p.: Talonbooks, 2010.
Oppenheimer, Joel, Ed Dorn, and Joanne Kyger. "Three Versions of the Poetic Line."
Credences 2, no. 1 (March 1997).
Opstedal, Kevin. Dreaming as One: Poetry, Poets and Community in Bolinas, California
1967-1980. N.p.: Big Bridge, n.d.
Available Online http://www.bigbridge.org/bol-int.htm
———. "A Literary History of the San Andreas Fault: Bolinas Section."
http://www.jackmagazine.com/issue3/renhist.html.
Ostriker, Alicia. "Of Being Numerous." Partisan Review 29 (1972).
Peabody, Richard, ed. A different beat: writings by women of the beat generation.
London: Serpent's Tail, 1997.
Rothenberg, Michael. "FRENZIED SWEETNESS: AN INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL
ROTHENBERG AND DAVID MELTZER." By Christopher Luna. Rain Taxi
Online Edition. Last modified 2010. http://www.raintaxi.com/frenzied-sweetnessan-interview-with-michael-rothenberg-and-david-meltzer/.
Russo, Linda. "How You Want to Be Styled: Philip Whalen in Correspondence with
Joanne Kyger, 1959-1964." In Among Friends: Engendering the Social Site of
Poetry, edited by Annie Dewey and Libbie Rifkin. Iowa City, IA: University of
Iowa Press, 2013.
———. "Introduction: a context for reading Joanne Kyger." Jacket #11, 2000.
———. "Particularizing People's Lives: Joanne Kyger in conversation with Linda
Russo." Jacket Magazine #11, 2000.
———. "Strange Big Moon: The Japan and India Journals: 1960-1964." Big Bridge: A
Webzine of of Poetry and everything else.
http://www.bigbridge.org/issue7/fictlrusso.htm.

68

———. "'to be Jack Spicer in a dream': Joanne Kyger and the San Francisco
Renaissance, 1957-65." Jacket Magazine, 1999.
———. "To Deal with Parts and Particulars: Joanne Kyger’s Early Epic Poetics." In
Girls Who Wore Black: Women Writing the Beat Generation, edited by Ronna
Johnson and Nancy Grace. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2002.
Schelling, Andrew. "Joanne Kyger's Portable Poetics." Jacket #11, 2000.
Silliman, Ron. "e-mail to Linda Russo from Ron Silliman." Electronic Poetry Center.
http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/kyger/silliman.html.
———. "Monday, July 09, 2007." Silliman's Blog. Entry posted July 2007.
http://ronsilliman.blogspot.com/search?q=joanne+kyger.
Skinner, Jonathan. "Generosity and Discipline: The Travel Poems." Jacket #11, 2000.
Smith, Dale. "As Ever by Joanne Kyger." Bookslut.
http://www.bookslut.com/poetry/2003_07_000126.php.
———. "AS EVER BY JOANNE KYGER." Book Slut. Last modified July 2003.
http://www.bookslut.com/poetry/2003_07_000126.php.
———. "Energy on The Page-- Joanne Kyger in Coversation with Dale Smith." Jacket
#11, 2000.
Spicer, Jack. my vocabulary did this to me: The Collected Poetry of Jack Spicer. Edited
by Peter Gizzi and Kevin Killian. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press,
2008.
Theado, Matt. "Beat Generation Literary Criticism." Contemporary Literature 45, no. 4
(2004).
Vermont, Charlie. "Vertical Portrait of Joanne Kyger-- a poem and a letter." Jacket #11,
2000.
Vincent, Stephen. "About Now: Collected Poems By Joanne Kyger." bigbridge.org. Last
modified January 2008. http://www.bigbridge.org/REV-JKSV.HTM.
———. "Testing the Sublime-- The Work of Joanne Kyger." Jacket #11, 2000.
Waldman, Anne, comp. The Beat Book: Poems and Fiction from the Beat Generation.
Boston: Shambhala, 1996.
———. "Introduction to Strange Big Moon." Jacket 11, 2000.

69

Wieners, John. The Journal of John Wieners is to be called 707 Scott Street for Billie
Holiday. Edited by Lewis Warsh and Fanny Howe. Los Angeles, CA: Sun &
Moon Classics, 1996.
“Women and the Beats Panel” Audio File. Naropa Poetics Audio Archive. June 2000.
archive.org/details/Women_And_The_Beats_Panel_June_2000_00P013

70

