Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

Faces and Myth
Robin Crofut-Brittingham
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Crofut-Brittingham, Robin, "Faces and Myth" (2011). Senior Projects Spring 2011. Paper 135.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/135

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Faces and Myth
Poetry and Paintings by Robin Crofut-Brittingham

1

When I began conceiving of what kind of a poetry project I would like to
undertake I was spending a great deal of time thinking about Greek and Roman classics. I
have always been fascinated by myths and their ability to create a world in which to
imagine- to escape. Last year, however, for the first time I began to reconsider the
illustrious and fantastical place I had assigned the world of myth in my mind. In one of
my classes I began to read Lucretius’ tome of a poem On the Nature of Things. I had
been learning things about poetry and philosophy for my entire time at Bard, trying to
make sense of ideas as singular objects. These were ideas to be one at a time dissected,
examined and then perhaps discarded. But when I began reading Lucretius everything
seemed to culminate in my mind. He seemed to be describing the same basic ebb and
flow of life: the vacillating tides of thought and self that wind and encircle themselves
about the eaves of time. However, suddenly, perhaps because it was poetry I felt so
connected to the text. How could something written thousands of years ago hit me over
the head with relevance to the present I began to wonder how something so antiquated, so
ornate and old could strike me with so much power and wonder. This led me to wonder
about everything in time is connected and how I might come to understand It for myself.
Obviously this is something that has been done to death, philosophers, painters, scientists,
thinkers of any sort imaginable have tried to answer this question and perhaps some of
them found a sayisfactory answer for themselves. That is what I have tried to do here. I
am not looking for an answer, an end or even a begining.
Robert once suggested that these poems were like individual observations. Some
of them as though I were looking at a wound on my body and describing the way the
blood pooled and dried in the open wound. I think that may be the best way I can explain
them. They are observations about time and flesh. I want to explore the way time
manipulates things. I want to explore how faces stretch and sink to reveal new characters,
how things burn to the ground in the hissing spark of an evening only to have plants grow
from their ashes. Most importantly I wanted to know how words braid themselves into
the currents of time. In his essay The Poet Ralph Waldo Emerson writes, “we have far
from exhausted the significance of the few symbols we use. We can come to use them yet
with a terrible simplicity. It does not need that a poem should be long. Every word was
once a poem.” I am trying to see what I might make of the discarded poems and words
that have been scattered about us and how I might make them into my own thoughts.
The paintings that accompany the poems explore the same themes. While I was
writing I was simultaneously creating watercolor paintings that helped me to better
understand some of the things I was working on in my poetry. I am fascinated by faces
and by the myths that can surround a single face. At first I chose faces that struck me for
their ability to suggest a singular emotion or theme in the folds of their skin. The early
portraits are meant to portray larger ideas about human nature like sadness, grief, power,
or loneliness. As I continued to work on this series I realized that I could connect these
faces to ancient archetypes for these singular emotions. So I began to chose pictures of
contemporary faces that I felt could serve as a representation, perhaps even a kind of
reincarnation of an ancient character or archetype. The paintings will be displayed in a
samll gallery in Sandisfeild, Massachussets throughout the month of May.
I owe a great deal to those wonderful minds at Bard and elsewhere that have
inspired and encouraged me thoughout my time there. Robert Kelly, my advisor was one
of the first teachers at Bard that I worked with and he continues to be one of the people
who inspires and challenges me the most. I would also like to thank Thomas Bartscherer
and Benjamin Stevens for showing me just how fresh and exhilerating the classics can be,

2

even now, Michael Ives for helping me to break out of my comfort zone and write poetry
in forms I was afraid of.

3

I.

4

sky is spilled out
soft bruised pools of cadmium
veins of tress stretched into light
divergent capillaries of darkness

5

cold has left wounds in the air where the fruit should be
wet leaves dangle in their place

6

storms come
grass shrieks
tumbling thunder turns
fills the valley with a low hush
sky boils
decoction of stars
warm erosions of ochre spread like ink
dilute the fleshy cadmium black

7

thoughts
silted into memory and striations of time
fall back into the ground
they rest below the earth
fertilized by the evening rain
when lighting strikes the tree at the root
etches the topography of its voice in a crooked line of blackness that paints the night alive
thoughts are pushed out of memory
back into time
by the storm

8

lightning breaks the stillness
strikes and shakes the veins of the tree
knots at the top
vessels filled with warm sap tangled in air where they drain and pull
fill with smoked sky

9

the fruits
organs of the tree
drop back to the earth like gods pushed from empyrean
limp mortals chained to the dirt
soon to become flesh of the ground
rotted into the pulp of history
where they will rest until fertilized again

10

watch the crows
black slick of feathers crinkling silver in the sunlight
they pierce the flesh with their beaks and it will grow back
flesh
left picked of its fertility
fades back into the moss
stretched across the skin of rocks
poured out between the mountains by the gods who sketched us here among the trees

11

the gods rest dormant
coiled obliquely somewhere in the brain
they perform their rituals in the chest cavity
carving cave drawings into the fiber
but the body heals them over
intent on its own wisdom
those gods can never grow back

12

II.

13

the mist of the clouds settles on the skirts of night
a meek effulgence of air
groaning through spirals in the heat of the dunes
cold encircling the shuddering breast of the ground
sparks jumping in the fog
transient rays of self entangling
color imprisons the canyons
nocturnes of falling sound

14

half of the world is sand
the other half has eroded away
water would be the ash of air if we could burn air like we used to
humans are breathing animals
birds mollusks insects trees voices men
seraphs of smoke
moonlight pinned to the parapets
folded into the tiles
mucilage of the day
fade into darkness

15

children drink in voices
pulse of the present
sheath them in gloves of acrid smoke
pathogens pistons poisons
numb neutered nebulae
we know that shapes are lies
that only the circles of oxygen mouths exists
birds suckling for silence
masticated time digests in the void
the anguish of the sad fossil world

16

III.

17

Thin is an absence from the torso and upper extremities that renders it woman
found only when caught between the light that strains through leguminous plants
man is the amount of soft left in the absence of hard remaining only after stomach egrets
have picked the bones from the caverns and retreated back to the intestine caves

18

gods are made from a tincture infused with the stamen of winter flowers and the paste of
ancient roots
humans apply this once a day
to imitate themselves
this is how we learn mimesis
this is how we learn to consume ourselves

19

lovers are composed with the amount of lust congruent with attraction resulting in an
equation that can only be solved in childbirth
when recording mating rituals the empiricist may observe woman calling out in birdsong
and man mistakenly watching as bats rustle the leaves of fruit trees
thinking them sparrows
man watches
woman becomes night

20

pleasure is found with the amount of infusion required to heal over the thick wound in the
sky so that man may recognize plumage in the dark
sex is the correct amount of bodies required to unlock a door
causing a thick rash on the eyes it can only be healed with a neutering tincture requested
from empyrean
empty vessels
render woman
that which is becoming man
a feminine atavism seen only in sunlight

21

man is woman
shaken up by briny light
pulled from the teat of the day
an imperceptible shade
that reminds them to count to enough

22

Locust trees grow at the edges of things
wombs swelling on the limbs
lines of branches gnarled between the wind
atoms caught in spaces
waiting for the lights of the liver to indicate the dawn
hepatic candles of the earth
lit by the swing of the evening’s pendulum

23

fire blinks in the dark
crawls across the earth
an oriborus of light spinning through the reeds
pestilence of fire unfurls
branches dance in the heat wavering
mirages of night
pods dried and split
seeds spit to the ground
the tree crumbles
splinters of age break in the fresh inferno of sky
the last branches sink to the ground
blackened by the blaze

24

smoke fades
sputters
the ground rests on the salt of the earth
berries grow up through the embers
blossoming green and then cloudy nacreous blue

25

IV.

26

the weather is mild in the land of the dead
the rivers churn for angry miles

27

evening fades
draws back the hunger curtains of the night
bulbs of dusk ascend up rungs of gold into the twilight
night roars in with kicks and whinnies
bucks and shouts
sommersalting stars in the open belly of sky
trees hackled in the rising fog

28

dead are burned on boats at the shore
esculent mushrooms rising in the night
juices blistering in drops on the earth’s tongue
accents of breath dissolving
skeletons prepare for the air
petals of skull and ash that fail to enrich the bitter soil
upturned mummies of the clay

29

the rivers churn for angry miles
throaty spasms of night
sticks and crayfish bubbling in the swollen estuaries
corpses rolling bruised among the rocks
lolling arms and bleeding eyes
tangled in the turning waves

30

A discolored man bathes in the sea
squeezing the stems of aquatic flowers
soothsayer of the silent shoots
isthmus of the phosphorescent spores
the sky drinks in the vinous beads of color
footprints
plumage of plants
punctured sunlight
yolk of pain
bebido de sangre, bebido de salud, bebido de soledad

31

imagine the dead who rest in the gardens of Tangier
glass and organs tied between the hustle of bushes
dandelions growing up through their armpits
flowers buzzing in the open sockets of eyes

32

the women will not let their children see these brothers
will not pick the flowers of the dead
they gather herbs around them
and slaughter fowl in the streets

33

Cloisters of silence rise in the mist
Saturated with fog and rain
They drift over the graves
Kites falling on the night

34

bodies are wrapped for burial in the evening
flies resting in empty eyes
buzzing in savage green valleys

35

night comes sputtering in
lamps of day turned over in rain
hiding those wretched thinking pieces of clay
death lapping at puddles of rain
skeletons sitting drunk in their graves
freshly buried blue mouths filled with sky

36

there is a ruby colored rope that creaks in the body
pulls wrinkled shadows out from their corners
sugared holes punctured by sad acid
blind ivy that grows in the lungs
without the smiling light of sun

37

adders hiss in the diaphragm
curl themselves through naked rooms
dark techtonics of night

38

supine shells of man
return to the women at dusk
mouths splayed up
bacteria surging in the gut
pollinating the compost of their folded eyes

39

burn them at dusk
when breath clings to the crepuscular cusp of day
voices lapping at the red tide
pulling them back into the basaltic womb

40

death heals the decay of things
salamanders curl among the tufted weeds
stars mark the arch of bodies in the sky
dulcet cavers of voice echo in the light
obdurate buds peak through the lazy snow

41

V.

42

shadow waits
plaited among the pieces
geometric patches of measured darkness
edges of the afternoon

43

parts catch the beads of light and drip down
gelatinous puddles of something astrological
signs that refract the reflection of words
gesticulating arbitrary meanings on the pericardium of sky
undulating tides of memory
twisted among solar ephermera
drizzles of moonlight
darkness well suited for devotion
words wobble up in tangerine spirals to meet the sunset

44

lightining strikes again at the root
catalyzes corpulent strings of self
synaptic flashes
irridescent streams
fresh basilisk blood yelping with hissing hums that rise up as shaped shrieks in the silver
sliver of sky
a night to conjure
mephitic human vapor rises
dilutes the atmosphere and pervades
moisture clotting in the raw air
fractures in the ether that surrounds the world
troglodytic holes of human carved out by time
tangled with capillary vines and rain

45

the womb of the brain fills up
gestates poisoned flowers
blossoming ripe with ethereal petals
maturing with symbols at the stamen
curling into coruscating filigree
diegetic anatomy spills out
to be read

46

the silk of the spider is entwined about the architecture
strings braid themselves up from the ground
pull fiber from the earth and air

47

the body runs naked
born of the breed of soil
spawned by the day
whelped by earth
fragile homunculus moss
watching the sky shake the red trees
laced windows
manacles of imagination

48

limbs carry them up to the mountains
steam of sylph
crazed of mind
sick with spirit
self digests
cannibalizes
vapor sucked back into porous holes
transformed
dropped as stone
breaking the glinting surface of viridian pools
lightning born seeds of man

49

opalescent tide pools
vestigial signifiers of progeny
of what had happened in the future

50

the crinkling walls grow
they jabber
whisper chatter argue
echo
it’s the light that makes them jabber
shout and then jabber
it’s the light that gives them sound

51

the body decomposes
running out through the fabric it sewed itself into
men hits the burlap with ringing thwaps
leaving the imprint of their flying forms
shadows sewn into the light

52

