Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

Haruki Murakami's The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle:
The Power of Storytelling
Dennis M. Donnelly
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Donnelly, Dennis M., "Haruki Murakami's The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle: The Power of Storytelling" (2011). Senior Projects Spring
2011. Paper 121.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/121

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Haruki Murakami's The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle:
The Power of Storytelling

Senior Project submitted to
Department of Language and Literature
of Bard College
by
Dennis Donnelly

Annandale-On-Hudson, New York
April 2011

1
The Wind Up Bird Chronicle is, on many levels, a story about story
telling in which interconnected and also counterpointed stories all add up
to a narrative exploration of how individuals and societies may be able to
both penetrate more deeply into personal and social reality and emerge
from the depths of exploration with some real if albeit tenuous insight.
While the book insists repeatedly that are no set answers to the great
universal questions and also warns that the quest for meaning itself can be
a failure which leaves us ruined, the appeal of Murakami’s stories is still so
compelling that it propels the reader towards their own exploration of the
meaning of meaning.
Inside the pages of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, stories are a
powerful and complicated force for both good and ill. The novel is on the
surface primarily about Toru Okada's struggling marriage and his quest to
rescue/recover/regain his wife Kumiko, but there is much more to The
Wind-Up Bird Chronicle than Toru's narrative alone. The majority of the
novel is Toru's direct narration of events, but the work contains a vast
variety of other stories embedded within newspaper articles, letters,
internet chat rooms, memories, history books, dreams, computer
documents and last but not least old fashioned conversation. In fact, Toru is
for the most part a rather passive protagonist – though he does have his
moments of both decisive action and violence – and as a narrator this is
reflected in his willingness to get absorbed in the stories of others.

2
The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle is not only the novel's title but also the
name of a numbered series of sixteen stories mentioned within it. The act of
eponymously naming these stories and equating them with the novel itself
underscores not only the importance of the wind-up bird as a symbol, but
also how the act of storytelling is crucial to constructing the meaning of the
work.
In a rare interview, Murakami further emphasizes the importance of
stories when he revealed that, “I’m looking for my own story…and
descending to my own soul…We have rooms in ourselves. Most of them we
have not visited yet…From time to time we can find the passage…I’m
looking for my own story in myself... People are looking for their tales
inside themselves. Without tales people can’t live their lives.” (Thompson)
Murakami’s own personal process of looking for and constructing his own
story reflects the narrative style of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle itself.
According to critic Matthew Strecher, Murakami breaks with the
traditional belief that the role of the author is to “illustrate transcendent
truths.” Rather, Murakami believes in “the power of stories, of words
themselves, to allow readers to develop their own personal sense of truth
and reality, and to make sense of the world for themselves.” (Reader’s
Guide 21) This search for a “personal sense of truth and reality” through
telling and listening to stories not only describes Toru’s own journey of selfdiscovery but the reader’s relationship to the text.

3
At the start of the novel Toru asks a grand question that the novel
seems to at least partly answer – “Is it possible, finally, for one human
being to achieve perfect understanding of another?” (24). Yet the book is
also distinctly about a second related question: Is it possible for one human
being to achieve even imperfect understanding of themselves or their
society? Toru explains to the reader that he had never been one to think
seriously about such big questions until very recently after he quit his job.
Toru “had simply been too busy” to think about himself because his “hands
had been full just living” (24). Since he has only been living on the surface
of things, Toru has no idea has no idea how to proceed with his quest. At
first, Toru is groping in the dark for answers. Through the stories that he
hears from others, particularly from Mamiya, Creta, Nutmeg and
Cinnamon, Toru gains crucial knowledge and wisdom that empowers him
to take a more active role in recovering Kumiko. However the stories that
Toru encounters also reveal, both to Toru and to the reader, that his own
journey is simply one part of an interconnected web of people and
experiences. In fact, Toru's very private struggle to rescue his wife is
fundamentally a public struggle as well. No one says this better than May
Kasahara when she tells Toru that:
Sometimes, when I'm looking at you, I get this feeling like maybe
you're fighting real hard against something for me. I know this
sounds weird, but when that happens, I feel like I'm right with you,

4
sweating with you. See what I mean? You always look so cool, like
no matter what happens, it's got nothing to do with you, but you're
not really like that. In your own way, you're out there fighting as
hard as you can, even if other people can't tell by looking at you. If
you weren't, you wouldn't have gone into the well like that, right?
But anyhow, you're not fighting for me, of course. You're falling all
over yourself, trying to wrestle with this big whatever it-is, and the
only reason you're doing it is so you can find Kumiko. So there's no
point in me getting all sweaty for you. I know all that, but still, I
can't help feeling that you are fighting for me, Mr. Wind-Up Bird –
that, in a way, you probably are fighting for a lot of other people at
the same time you're fighting for Kumiko. And that's maybe why
you look like an absolute idiot sometimes. (324-325)
In the same way, Toru's story needs the complementary stories of others to
be fully understood, and his private struggle is actually a far more universal
one.
The answers to the larger questions posed by The Wind-Up Bird
Chronicle are only partially answered, just as the final fate of the characters
is largely uncertain. The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle does not provide easy
answers but does hint at an incomplete, imperfect resolution. Murakami
provides the reader with the lines that make up his story, but assigning
meaning within this framework requires reading between those lines.

5
Furthermore, the stories that make up The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle can
only be understood when they are all viewed together as a unified whole –
which is impossible given the fragmented nature of the stories. Even the
novel's internal double – the sixteen documents written by Cinnamon and
entitled “The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle #1-16” – are mostly inaccessible to
both Toru and the reader - who only get to read one of these sixteen stories.
For all of the shimmering, delicate half-light that Murakami pours upon the
deep and complex truths he examines, there is an inherent limit to what can
be revealed.

Style, Structure, Imagery, Author

6

A look at the structure of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle reveals
Murakami’s complex plan hidden beneath a seemingly simple narrative.
Three major separate stories are told within two different time periods.
Various sub-stories directly and indirectly add to both Toru’s and the
reader’s understanding. To add to its pleasing complexity, The Wind-Up
Bird Chronicle can also be seen as a quest, a romance, a myth, a detective
story, and a historical narrative, deftly blended with elements of both the
real and the surreal.
Although Toru’s first-person narration composes the bulk of the
chronicle, Murakami switches perspective throughout by linking from both
the present and the past. The frequent appearance of these stories, told in
the third person, forces the reader to examine their connection to Toru’s
search for meaning.
The time frame of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, set in mid 80’s Japan
also provides a clue to Murakami’s meaning. The three books that comprise
the novel take place from June, 1984 to December, 1985. However, the
novel’s actual time frame stretches from the early 1930’s to 1985. In Dances
With Sheep, Matthew Strecher explains that “Murakami’s type of ‘nonJapanese Japanese literature’ could only have been produced (a) near or
after the end of the Cold War, (b) in the atmosphere of cultural curiosity
fostered by the so-called ‘postmodern moment,’ and (c) during a time when

7
Japan reached a peak both in its economic and cultural influences
worldwide.” (2) This confluence of events occurred in mid-80’s Japan,
creating the perfect environment for Murakami’s break from the traditional
Japanese literary forms.
Murakami’s typically alienated young male hero is a product of
Japan’s success and its effect on their culture. In Dances with Sheep,
Strecher references Marilyn Ivy’s work in Postwar Japan as History stating
that Murakami’s heroes are like his readers who might have lost sight of
their real identity in “a coordinated effort on the part of industry and the
mass media to create a permanent body of mass consumers” resulting in “a
new social atmosphere of materialism and self-absorption which gradually
progressed to smaller and smaller social units ending with the individual.”
(18) This overemphasis on the success necessary to support a materialistic
ethos has stripped Japanese culture of meaningful values, further
alienating its youth. If the only common goal is to consume more, then that
emptiness becomes part of the national character. Toru’s search for self
and meaning therefore represents a wider search for meaning throughout
Japanese culture. Yet this search for meaning is not uniquely Japanese,
which helps to explain the universal appeal of Murakami’s writing. As Sam
North says, Murakami “does not attempt to explain Japan. I don’t think he
writes for us, or them. He writes about lost souls who find an unsatisfactory
salvation or a fragment of happiness.” Murakami’s typical hero is a sort of

8
universal modern everyman, trying to understand and fix his identity in a
world of conflicting and often meaningless values.
This sense of loss and alienation is shown in the many images of
emptiness and isolation in the novel:
There was something more strained in its [the bird sculpture] gaze. It
seemed to be staring hard at some extraordinarily depressing sight
that was floating in the sky. If only it could have done so, the bird
would have liked to avert its gaze, but with its eyes locked in place the
way they were, it had no choice except to look. The tall weeds
surrounding the sculpture remained motionless, like a chorus in a
Greek tragedy waiting breathlessly for an oracle to be handed down.
(315)
His language also shows the difficulty and angst associated with trying to
find one’s place within a regimented and complex modern society, as when
Toru observes that “the variety of professions in this world was amazing,
each assigned its place amid the paper’s neat rows, as on a new graveyard
map.” (57) The alienation is palpably post-modern - “I could have been
looking at a De Chirico scene: the woman’s long shadow cutting across an
empty street and stretching toward me, but she herself in a pace far
removed from the bounds of my consciousness.” (20) Such imagery
foreshadows and reinforces the book’s own examination of these topics.

9
Murakami also includes foreign cultural references, as well as
contemporary commercial images, in his work. His references are to both
high culture and low pop culture. In The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, Toru can
move with ease from talking of Rossini and De Chirico to May’s brand of
Hope cigarettes and Andy Williams playing on his dry cleaner’s boom box.
All of this sets Murakami’s fiction apart from both the classic Japanese
literary style and the work of the other prominent contemporary Japanese
authors. Much of Murakami’s popularity stems from his easy and authentic
use of modern and often American references. Murakami translator Jay
Rubin says that “if Murakami’s copious pop references represent anything,
it is his entire generation’s rejection of their parents’ culture.” (17)
Despite, or perhaps in rebellion to, being the son of two Japanese
language and literature teachers, Murakami immersed himself at an early
age in the work of modern American authors such as Raymond Carver,
Dashiell Hammett, Truman Capote, Raymond Chandler, F. Scott Fitzgerald,
Franz Kafka, John Irving, and Kurt Vonnegut. Even though he admires the
style of the detective novel and his protagonists are often involved in a quest
to find someone or something, Murakami is only using some of the key
elements of American hard-boiled fiction in service of his own ends. As
outlined by Cynthia S. Hamilton in her study of this type, Murakami makes
extensive use of “the use of simple, stripped-down sentences, the portrayal
of actions as a series of component movements, the use of understatement,

10
and the practice of giving descriptively equal treatment to human beings
and to inanimate objects.” (qtd in Fisher) This lends a hard-boiled quality
to the novel while still allowing it to address deeper questions than the
typical gumshoe story.
In an interview in The Paris Review, Murakami addressed his use of
description of mundane details: “I like details very much. Tolstoy wanted to
write the total description; my description is focused on a very small area.
When you describe the details of small things, your focus gets closer and
closer, and the opposite of Tolstoy happens—it gets more unrealistic.” To
help shape his economic, stripped-down style, both Rubin and Strecher
discuss Murakami’s practice of writing in English, and then translating into
Japanese. “Writing in English, my vocabulary was limited, and I couldn’t
write long sentences. So that way a kind of rhythm took hold, with relatively
few words and short sentences.” (Rubin 36)
In The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, as well as most of his other works,
Murakami’s narrator uses the first-person pronoun, I (or boku) to tell his
tale, which as Strecher tells us, is in direct contrast to classic Japanese
fiction which avoids overuse of pronouns, except where clarity is at stake.
(Dancing with Sheep 4) Rubin elaborates on the importance of the use of
the boku, because this casual and unpretentious pronoun would primarily
be used only by young men in informal circumstances. (37)

11
Murakami’s voice in The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle is a perfect match
for his protagonist, Toru. Toru tells his tale in a very direct and forthright
style, much like himself. He uses simple, everyday language to relate the
series of increasingly bizarre events that begin to occur in his life with a
calm and composed voice that never betrays any hint of surprise or
concern. The ordinary tone and simple style of his narrative lends
increased verisimilitude to Toru’s extraordinary experiences. It is as if
Toru is relating these events to a friend, rather than to those reading a work
of fiction. Despite the strange occurrences, it all seems quite normal, as
something happening in real life. At the same time, there is also the sense
of being awake during a nightmare. Anything and everything can and does
happen. Perhaps that is what Murakami had in mind as he explains his
writing process, “If I knew everything before I wrote, it would be boring.
The things and the people come to me automatically. I don’t ‘make up’
anything.” (Thompson)

Toru

12
Murakami’s typical hero, or boku, is a young, rather passive Japanese

male. He is often a loner, like Murakami himself. Murakami said, “My
protagonist is acting like he’s playing a video game. He’s detached. He has
to respond to what’s happening.” (Thompson) He is searching for some
meaning in his life, when all around him there seems to be none. In an
interview for the Paris Review, Murakami describes his hero:
My protagonist is always missing something, and he’s searching for
that missing thing…He has to search for it. He’s like Odysseus. He
experiences so many strange things in the course of his search. He
has to survive those experiences, and in the end he finds what he is
searching for. But he is not sure it’s the same thing. I think that’s the
motif of my books…It’s the driving power of my stories: missing and
searching and finding. And disappointment, a kind of new awareness
of the world…Experience itself is meaning. The protagonist has
changed in the course of his experiences—that’s the main thing. Not
what he found, but how he changed.
Toru fits this model perfectly. He has temporarily removed himself
from the fray by quitting his job as a self-proclaimed gofer at a law firm. He
leaves his job not to help him realize any goals or prospects, but just
because he feels he might stay there forever if he didn’t leave now. He
becomes a house husband, something that is definitely not acceptable for a

13
30-year old Japanese male. Home alone while his wife Kumiko pursues her
career as a magazine editor, Toru cleans and irons, markets and cooks,
reads and listens to music. All the while, he is seemingly unconcerned about
how this lapse will affect his career trajectory because he doesn’t feel that
having a career is vitally important in his life at this time. He views this
time as his one great vacation. As he tells Kumiko, “Nope. No plans. Not
yesterday, not today, not tomorrow: no plans at all.” (34) This is clearly not
the norm for an intelligent 30-year old Japanese male. So The Wind-Up
Bird Chronicle begins with its hero happily cooking spaghetti and whistling
to Rossini’s The Thieving Magpie, without any apparent ambition or drive.
However, Toru’s self-imposed calm doesn’t last long before he
receives a bizarre phone call from a woman whose voice he can’t recognize,
but who knows all about him. She wants ten minutes of his time so they can
understand each other, and have some quality phone sex. Toru hangs up on
her. Toru is atypical in his respect and deference for sex throughout his
tale. He’s not interested in May Kasahara’s men’s magazines or her hints
about a possible relationship between them. He loves Kumiko, more than
he ever seems to desire her physically, calling their love not electric, but
“something quieter and gentler.” He allows himself to be used later in a
quasi-sexual way to heal anonymous women’s internal imbalances, but
even though the experiences are sexual, he seems to take no real pleasure in
doing so. Throughout it all, he remains a highly principled and moral man

14
who respects and values women. This is one of the many qualities that put
him in direct opposition to Kumiko’s brother Noburo Wataya. Toru
respects and uses sex to heal; Noburo cares only about himself and uses sex
to destroy women’s souls. Toru is also so trusting that he is shocked to
discover his wife’s disappearance and affair. Malta Kano tells him that trust
is one of the finest qualities a person can have.
Matthew Strecher feels that like many other Murakami heroes,
“Toru’s inner nature, one of forbearance and self-control, will not allow
him to betray the trust May Kasahara shows him by committing what would
be, for him, an unpardonably immoral act.” (Reader’s Guide 27-28) The
implication is that a morally superior person like Toru knows the difference
between good and bad sexuality, unlike Noburo. Toru uses sexuality for
love and to heal; Noburo uses sexuality to dominate and destroy.
Toru is remarkably passive, doing nearly everything Kumiko,
Nutmeg, Creta, Malta, and even May tell him. He says, “I had no choice.
Kumiko had told me to do as the woman said…and I had better do as I was
told.” (35) He goes out to search for their missing cat on her orders. He
wonders what he’s doing having May talk to him for so long in her
backyard, but doesn’t leave and just lets her continue. For most of the
novel, Toru lets things happen to him. The channeler/clairvoyant Malta
tells him that he is entering a phase of his life in which many different
things both good and bad will occur, specifying that bad things will seem

15
good at first, while the good things will seem bad at first. Her touch and
eyes make Toru feel as if he has been turned into “a vacant house. I felt
empty: no furniture, no curtains, no rugs. Just an empty container.” (44)
This is the first of many mentions of emptiness and vacant houses, which
not only reference the empty well, but also the passive, receptive state of
mind necessary before one can pursue wholeness.
Despite his passivity, Toru is also brave and loyal, as is seen in his
dogged pursuit of Kumiko and refusal to be cowed by Noburo’s attempts to
prevent him from communicating with her again. He realizes that he had
“to pull her back into this world. Because if I didn’t, that would be the end
of me. This person, this self that I thought of as ‘me,’ would be lost.” (338)
His career might not be important to him, but love and loyalty certainly are
and he pursues them with knight-like devotion despite the many dangers
and roadblocks he encounters. He emerges as a heroic anti-hero, a very
modern champion who will fight for his wife in both the real and surreal
world.
Toru’s passivity ties in with a recurring theme of The Wind-Up Bird
Chronicle. Mr. Honda, the practitioner of spirit possession Toru and
Kumiko used to visit early in their marriage, prophetically speaks to Toru of
the flow: “The point is, not to resist the flow. You go up when you’re
supposed to go up and down when you’re supposed to go down. When
you’re supposed to go up, find the highest tower and climb to the top. When

16
you’re supposed to go down, find the deepest well and go down to the
bottom. When there’s no flow, stay still. If you resist the flow, everything
dries up. If everything dries up, the world is darkness.” (51) His warning to
be careful of water, as well as the stories he told them about the battle of
Nomonhan, have implications for Toru later on. Rather than just being
passive, in the early part of his story Toru is going with the flow and waiting
to see what happens.
Mr. Honda tells them his stories, which Toru feels sound like fairy
tales, to the background of his huge television blaring the news from the
government-sponsored network. Instead of a flower arrangement or
calligraphic scroll, his living room’s alcove holds his huge television and
Mr. Honda sits in front of it stirring his divining sticks. Murakami is
visually showing that even though this modern invention has replaced the
wisdom and beauty of the past, knowledge is still accessible, even when
hidden. On the television, Toru listens to a professor talking of how people’s
chaotic use of grammar corresponds to the chaos in their lives, but
contends that properly speaking, it can’t be called chaos. Even though
someone higher up has set the rules for using grammar, people won’t
necessarily follow them. (52) This points to Toru’s refusal to follow the
rules not only of society, but also those dictated to him by Noburo, the
novel’s representative of the state. He encounters chaos because of this, but

17
ultimately it is good kind of chaos that could lead to understanding and
bring Kumiko back to him.
Trying to recover their missing cat, ironically named after Noburo
Wataya, brings Toru to the well Mr. Honda has mentioned. Toru looks for
their cat in the alley behind their home, an alley that had symbolically
“neither entrance nor exit,” an alley with “not one dead end but two.” (12)
Toru meets his neighbor May Kasahara, who shows him the empty well on
the property of a jinxed house bordering on the alley. Now Toru has access,
albeit through the blocked alley, to the well that may help him find himself
and Kumiko.
Toru’s quest to rescue Kumiko from her brother is mirrored by his
continuing attempts to understand her, with somewhat limited success. At
the beginning of the book, Toru poses an important question: “Is it possible,
finally, for one human being to achieve perfect understanding of another?
We can invest enormous time and energy in serious efforts to know another
person, but in the end, how close are we able to come to the person’s
essence? We can convince ourselves that we know the other person well,
but do we really know anything important about anyone?” (24) After
Kumiko accuses Toru of hardly paying any attention to her because he
doesn’t know her preferences in tissues, toilet paper, and recipes, he starts
to see that the meaning behind a trivial domestic dispute is actually
something quite crucial in his life. Toru says, “I might be standing in the

18
entrance of something big, and inside lay a world that belonged to Kumiko
alone, a vast world that I had never known. I saw it as a big, dark room. I
was standing there holding a cigarette lighter, its tiny flame showing me
only the smallest part of the room.” (30) Toru admits that “only much later
did it occur to me that I had found my way into the core of the problem.” It
becomes clear later in the book that the mysterious woman caller who
wants ten minutes of Toru’s time so they can understand each other is
Kumiko. But Toru doesn’t recognize her voice because this is the huge other
part of Kumiko he doesn’t know. Her conscious self that Toru knows and
lives with is so different than her unconscious self that even her voice, her
means of communication, is unrecognizable. So at this point, her cry for
help and cryptic attempts at communication go unanswered.
Kumiko’s sudden disappearance and the revelation of her affair and
request for a divorce further convinces Toru that he knew very little of the
woman he lived with for six years. Rather than abandoning an unfaithful
wife, he sees trying to rescue her also as a means of rescuing himself. The
quest will bring him greater understanding. However, since this is an
unusual modern quest for both her body and soul, Toru cannot go about it
in a conventional way.

The Well

19

Throughout The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, Murakami demonstrates
the many uses of the story: to enlighten, inform, or just amuse. But no use
is perhaps as important as that of acting as a conduit to another role or
stage in Toru’s life. It’s almost as if the stories are stops on a train journey
or points on a giant connect-the-dots puzzle that Toru must follow from
step to step to get to the end. Toru must mine important information from
them that will somehow move him closer to his goal, or provide some
necessary insight. For example, Toru’s uncle provides the background
stories that tell him about the terrible history of the jinxed house in the
alley that is the site of the all-important well.
However, Mr. Honda’s entertaining stories from the past and warning
about the danger of water and wisdom about the flow become much more
important when Toru becomes a beneficiary of his will. Because of this,
Toru meets Lieutenant Mamiya, a former soldier who served with Mr.
Honda in a military operation. Mamiya has come to deliver Honda’s
remembrance, a carefully wrapped box with specific instructions that Toru
open it alone. When Toru asks to hear the story of how the two met,
Mamiya agrees to break their pact of silence since Mr. Honda is now dead.
Mamiya reveals how he and Mr. Honda were on a dangerous, secret
intelligence mission in Manchukuo. The landscape has a powerful effect on
him which prefigures later scenes in the book: “When one is moving silently

20
through such an utterly desolate landscape, an overwhelming hallucination
can make one feel that oneself, as an individual human being, is slowly
coming unraveled…The mind swells out to fill the entire landscape,
becoming so diffuse in the process that one loses the ability to keep it
fastened to the physical self.” (138-139) The mission goes wrong, Mr. Honda
escapes, but Mamiya and Yamamoto, the actual spy, are captured by the
Russians. After Yamamoto is skinned alive without revealing information,
the Russian officer leaves Mamiya in the bottom of a well, believing he will
die there. Mamiya describes in detail the despair and horror of being
abandoned in the well and then the unexpected joy of a momentary ray of
sun. “The light of the sun shot down from the opening of the well like some
kind of revelation…As long as I remained in the light, I was able to forget
about my fear and pain and despair.” (165) When the moment has passed,
his despair is greater. When the light returns, the effect is even greater: “I
spread open both my hands and received the sun in my palms. If it could
have happened in the bliss of this marvelous light, even death would have
been no threat…I had a marvelous sense of oneness, an overwhelming
sense of unity. Yes, that was it: the true meaning of life resided in that
light.” (166) This elusive but illuminating light is a crucial image and
metaphor throughout the work.
After being rescued, Mamiya feels that the light he encountered in the
well burned up the very core of his life. He has ceased to feel anything

21
except a kind of numbness. That experience became the focal point of his
life, and the rest felt like a dream that he lives in like an empty shell. When
he and Toru part, Toru “felt a strange emptiness inside, a hopeless kind of
feeling like that of a small child who has been left alone in an unfamiliar
neighborhood.” (172) Upon returning home to unwrap the many layers of
carefully sealed paper covering Mr. Honda’s gift, Toru finds that it is an
empty box.
Mr. Honda, in all his wisdom, has left Toru the gift of Mamiya’s story.
It is another signpost for him to follow in his own quest. It was not enough
earlier to tell Toru that he should go to the bottom of the deepest well when
it was his time, but Mr. Honda also knew that Mamiya’s story would have a
much more powerful impact on Toru. The obvious symbolism of the light
Mamiya feels blessed by is usually thought of as enlightenment. He even
holds his hands out to receive it, as is usually seen in religious symbolism as
receiving the word of God. But despite his simple style, its meaning is much
more complex for Murakami. There can be no simple interpretation of the
light for everyone. Physically going down into a well is like burrowing deep
into the core of your existence to try and unearth the truth at its heart. In
The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle going down into the well is not only a
metaphor for discovering the truth at your core, it is also an actual
occurrence. Yet it is only an opportunity to attempt to uncover this truth or
meaning in yourself. It will not happen for everyone, as it does not for

22
Mamiya. Feeling himself so close to this source of light but never realizing
its true meaning or its benefits has left Mamiya an unfeeling empty shell.
An important difference between Mamiya and Toru is that Mamiya believes
that enlightenment is something he will receive, not something that he has
to search for. Perhaps that is the cause of his failure. Toru fights for
understanding and the return of Kumiko and achieves partial success.
Perhaps another aspect of Mr. Honda’s gift of Mamiya’s story is the
example that acquiring the wisdom that a stay in the well can provide is a
difficult, uncertain, and possibly lengthy business. Hoping to avoid
Mamiya’s tragic conclusion, this perhaps explains why Toru so desperately
wants to acquire the jinxed house and its property so he will have
unfettered access to the well. Mamiya was at a disadvantage not knowing
exactly what he could hope to understand from the well, but Toru intuits
that this is his way to recover Kumiko and gain understanding, so he
pursues it with dogged determination. Control of and access to the well also
allows him, under Nutmeg’s leadership, to become a healer later on in the
text. In a power struggle that recognizes the vital importance of the well,
Noburo Wataya uses Kumiko as a bargaining tool with Toru over its
possession. While Toru is using the well to heal and to reconnect with
Kumiko, Noburo sees it as a vulnerable contact point he must suppress to
protect himself. Ultimately, since Toru’s growth in understanding “flows”

23
from his time in the well, Noburo was right to want to stop Toru’s access to
it.
Another implication of Mamiya’s story is that not only are humans
not guaranteed the possible enlightenment found by a
conscious/unconscious stay in the well, they are not even guaranteed the
knowledge of this possibility. In The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, Toru sees the
mass of people in public places who are going about their usual lives,
crowded in trains going back and forth to jobs that sap all their time and
energy. Like Toru once did, they follow these patterns of accepted behavior
without giving them much thought because not only is this easier, but it
doesn’t require the bravery implicit in going down that deeply into your
core. Ordinary life occurs mostly on the surface, and is far from the depth
and danger of a real or imagined well. Murakami’s implication is that the
majority of people go through life without veering from the set course,
without questioning the rules set for them by society, and thus without
going through the tortuous passage of self discovery Toru undertakes.
Is self knowledge a blessing or a curse? Would Mamiya have been
happier not knowing there was some understanding he would never
achieve? Undoubtedly, but many people would still gamble on an attempt at
happiness and understanding rather than remaining in the dark. It is only
because Toru has detached himself from society by quitting his job that the
sequence of events that lead to his quest can even occur. In a similar way,

24
May Kasahara has also detached herself from the norm. As a high school
drop-out, she now has plenty of time to delve into herself and come to terms
with her innocent but deadly prank that caused the death of her boyfriend.
She has gone down her own well, in addition to showing Toru his, and has
emerged with a clearer but still imperfect sense of herself.
At the beginning of Book Two, Bird as Prophet, Toru is shocked that
Kumiko has left him without a word of explanation. Echoing the words of
Mr. Honda, Malta Kano, the mystic they were using to help find their
missing cat, tells Toru that, “there is a right time for everything. Like the
ebb and flow of the tides. No one can do anything to change them. When it
is time to wait, you must wait.” (179) But Toru is bereft, thinking that the
people on the street all had “an unnatural, even artificial, look to them.” He
wonders what kind of lives they lead. Although he doesn’t say it, the obvious
implication is that if he was so oblivious to what was going on with his wife,
how much can anyone ever know about the many people one meets in life.
Imagining himself on the seashore, he stretches out his hands, “palms
upward…and could feel the summer sun burning into them,” reminiscent of
Mamiya holding his hands up to the sun in the well. Toru’s previous sense
of contentment that he and Kumiko had a normal family life has been
shattered by his realization that she has probably left him for another man.
Just as Mamiya felt himself unraveling in the desert, Toru feels “if I shut my
eyes, I would float off somewhere else; I would end up in a wholly different

25
place.” (184) This feeling intensifies after a meeting with Noburo who tells
Toru that Kumiko wants a divorce and will not see him again. He tells Malta
later that every time he talks to Noburo he gets “this incredibly empty
feeling inside. Every single object in the room begins to look as if it has no
substance to it. Everything appears hollow.” (204) The feelings here
probably reference the disconnection felt when reality does not align with
our preconceived perceptions of what it should be. There is a split between
what we want and what we imagined we had. However, this is only a
prelude to the deeper disconnection between the conscious and
unconscious state that fragments the body and soul of many of the
characters.
The importance of story is shown again when Toru receives a letter
from Mamiya, who wants to further explain his experience in the well.
Mamiya believes that his:
consciousness had attained such a viscid state of concentration that
when the intense beam of light shone down for those few seconds, I
was able to descend directly into a place that might be called the very
core of my own consciousness…Something began to appear there.
Something that possesses life…It is trying to confer upon me
something very much like heavenly grace.” He has suffered
throughout his life from “the torture of being unable to attain a clear
view of that something in the light: the hunger of being unable to see

26
what I needed to see, the thirst of being unable to know what I needed
to know. (208)
He tells Toru that “once it is gone and one has failed to grasp its
offered revelation, there is no second chance.” (208) Mamiya doesn’t know
if his story will ever be of any use to Toru, but feels he has attained a kind of
salvation merely by telling his tale.
Rather than just attaining salvation for sharing his story, Mamiya’s
story also helps Toru to achieve his own version of salvation. A seemingly
random encounter with an old friend of his old advisor, Mr. Honda,
provides Toru with an unusual but valuable guideline on how to proceed.
Mamiya has given us one of the central themes of The Wind-Up Bird
Chronicle. The power of the story is the ability it gives its teller or listener
or even reader to make their own sense of it and how it relates to them and
their world. While narrative wisdom and/or relevance are not always
initially apparent, the stories become one’s personal library of experience,
both real and shared. As new stories are told and collected and stored, one’s
personal storehouse grows and as in a library, they are always available for
reference or take out when needed. Individually they might not seem or
actually be important, but as a whole they provide not only the tools of
decision making but the background of how we interpret new experiences.
They become an invaluable part of our psyche particularly because in

27
Murakami’s tales people and events often drift seamlessly between dreams
and reality, between the conscious and unconscious state.
As Toru explains to Nutmeg, he has to rescue Kumiko from
“someplace far away.” (406) Nutmeg thinks Toru’s quest is like the story of
The Magic Flute in which “the land of night is trying to recapture the
princess from the land of day. Midway through the opera, the heroes can’t
tell any longer which side is right.” (406) So, armed with information he
has gleaned from Mr. Honda and Mamiya and May and Malta and Creta,
Toru descends down the well of the abandoned house, with only an
emergency knapsack and a flashlight. Obviously this is the well Mr. Honda
spoke of and he knows it is his time to go down into it. He explains that he is
there to think about reality and the best way to do that is to get as far away
from it as possible.
The environment in the well affects him: “Here in this darkness, with
its strange sense of significance, my memories began to take on a power
they had never had before. The fragmentary images they called up inside
me were mysteriously vivid in every detail, to the point where I felt I could
grasp them in my hands.” (222) Therefore, unlike Mamiya, who reached out
for meaning but found nothing but despair in the darkness of his well, Toru
experiences a heightened and detailed sense of memory. Alone and
isolated, he is able to concentrate and reflect on the stories of his past with
Kumiko, and hopefully gain some perspective on what went wrong. He does

28
all this calmly and with no stated expectations of success. Since Toru
usually doesn’t explain his motives, it feels as if he has decided to give the
wisdom of Honda and Mamiya a try, but doesn’t know what will happen.
Toru has taken a major step in going down into the well. However, it’s both
an unusual and a passive approach compared to what most husbands would
do when trying to get back together with a wife who has left them. Rather
than hire a detective to locate her, Toru is going to be his own detective and
search their memories and their stories for the core of their relationship,
hoping it will lead him to her.
One memory in particular speaks to Toru’s new awareness of the
difficulty of truly knowing someone. In her explanation of her love of
jellyfish, Kumiko says, “What we see before us is just one tiny part of the
world. We get into the habit of thinking, this is the world, but that’s not true
at all. The real world is in a much darker and deeper place than this…all we
can see of it with the naked eye is the surface: the skin. We hardly know
anything about what’s underneath the skin.” (225-6) This shared story from
early in their relationship prefigures the difficulty Toru has later in
knowing what Kumiko is really like. She is warning Toru here that there is
more beneath her surface than he can see. Now he knows just how true that
warning is as the isolation of the well brings it back into sharp focus.
Blithely living on the surface during his marriage, Toru didn’t delve deeper
because everything seemed comfortable and normal. It is only now that that

29
surface calm has been disturbed that he must go deeper to get at some
greater hold on her truth, even if it means sitting at the bottom of a well to
do so. Also, it is only now that Toru begins the process of recollecting and
telling the story of how he and Kumiko fell in love.
Toru remembers feeling when they first made love that a switch had
been pulled and the body he was holding was a temporary substitute for the
real Kumiko, a prefigurement of her dual identity that he discovers later.
Another pivotal story in their lives involves Kumiko’s pregnancy and
abortion, and his strange encounter that evening in a bar, and its
subsequent impact on their relationship. During this time, Kumiko tells
Toru that “Sometimes I can’t tell what’s real and what’s not real…what
things really happened and what things didn’t really happen…that there’s
something inside me …that comes out every once in a while and messes up
whatever order or logic I’ve established for myself. The way a magnet can
make a machine go crazy.” (236) Kumiko is trying again to explain how the
discrepancies in her life between what she is and what she appears to be
have made her mistrust reality in the same way. However Kumiko is only
communicating with Toru on the surface. She is not sharing any of her real
fears with him, so it’s difficult to blame him for not picking up on her often
vague clues. He would have to have been a much better detective to read her
and be what she needed him to be at that point. Her attempts at
communication here and when she calls him later as the mysterious

30
telephone woman are true cries for help. Unfortunately, at the time Toru
lacked self awareness and the powerful impetus he now has to try and
discover the truth.
While in the well, Toru has a dream that is not a dream. “It was
something that happened to take the form of a dream.” (241) He sees
Noburo on a television screen, pretending to talk to the world, but Toru
knows his message is just for him. Noburo’s message is that everything is
both complicated and simple, one must “dig beneath the complicated
surface of reality…until you come to the very tip of the root.” (242) A
faceless man tells Toru he doesn’t belong here now, but Toru follows him to
a waiter, humming the overture to The Thieving Magpie, who leads him
down a hotel corridor to room 208. The telephone woman is inside and she
tells Toru that if he wants to find his wife, he must discover her name. That
is “the lever” he needs. She forces him to leave after hearing knocking on
the door, and when light from the corridor enters, they pass through the
wall. He feels intense heat on his cheek when she kisses him and when he
opens his eyes, he is back in the well.
As Murakami said in his interview with Matt Thompson of The
Guardian for World Press Review Online, “We have rooms in ourselves.
Most of them we have not visited yet…From time to time we can find the
passage. We find strange things…old phonographs, pictures, books…they
belong to us, but it is the first time we have found them.” The waiter who

31
leads Toru down endless hotel corridors to room 208 has brought him to
his unconscious self. Room 208 exists in Toru’s mind, but also appears to
exist in Kumiko’s, since it is the only place where their unconscious minds
can meet. Here he will have to face his fears, confront an unknown
assailant, and discover who the mysterious telephone woman really is. His
senses are heightened here, “the flowers perfectly fresh, retaining every bit
of their color and aroma,” just as they are in our dreams. Jay Rubin
compares Toru’s room 208 with George Orwell’s Room 101, where Winston
Smith, another legendary everyman, has to confront his greatest fear. (209)
The hotel/mind metaphor is an apt one. A trip into your unconscious is
similar to deciding which door of the many rooms/many memories you will
decide to open and venture into. The faceless man warns Toru that, “if you
go any farther, you won’t be able to come back,” (243) just as once you open
the Pandora’s box of your subconscious, you can’t easily shut it again.
Back in the well, Toru knows that what has happened was not a
dream. More memories of the aftermath of the abortion remind him of
Kumiko confessing that she wanted to tell him everything, but could not.
Toru shifts back and forth from reality to memory to his
dream/subconscious encounter in room 208. May has removed the ladder,
harshly trapping him. Her rather reckless and dangerous behavior is
similar to her actions that resulted in the death of her boyfriend.

32
Interestingly, it is only now for the first time that Toru gains the
power of recalling parts of his and Kumiko’s story. Once that door is
opened, a flood of new Toru/Kumiko facts emerge.
All analyses of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle have found Toru’s
descent into the well to find his wife to be reminiscent of Orpheus
descending into the underworld to recover his wife Eurydice. In the myth,
Eurydice has been set upon by a satyr and in her efforts to escape him falls
into a nest of vipers and suffers a fatal bite. (Wikipedia) Kumiko is set upon
by her brother and loses her core. Because of this loss of self which she
attributes to her tainted blood, similar to a nest of vipers living poisoning
her soul, she feels herself dead to the normal world she once shared with
Toru.
In Laura Miller’s Salon interview, Murakami himself said of the
Orpheus myth: “If you read Japan’s Kojiki (Record of Ancient Matters; ca.
712 C.E.), you find the story of Izanagi and Izanami. Izangi’s wife dies, and
lives in the ‘underworld.’ Izangi enters the world of the dead to see her. The
story of Orpheus is the same. The big difference in Japanese mythology is
that you can go underground very easily if you want to. In Greek myths you
have to go through all kinds of trials first.”
Translator Jay Rubin points out that, in Japanese, Toru literally
means “to pass through” and in the text he literally passes through the wall

33
separating the ordinary world from the world of the unknown. Rubin says
that “If the well is a passageway to the unconscious, the water at the bottom
represents the contents of the psyche. When Toru goes down into the dry
well, he takes on the role of its water, becoming almost pure psyche.” (208209) The well is the central mechanism in Toru’s evolution from a clueless
searcher to an open and receptive conduit who has the power to influence
events within his own subconscious.

The Wind-Up Bird

34

The specter of the wind-up bird reappears throughout the book.
However, it is not a simple symbol and has different meanings for different
characters. Early on in the book, the wind-up bird seems innocuous, like a
pretty idea shared by Toru and Kumiko to describe its song: “There was a
small stand of trees nearby, and from it you could hear the mechanical cry
of a bird that sounded as if it were winding a spring. We called it the windup bird. Kumiko gave it the name. We didn’t know what it was really called
or what it looked like, but that didn’t bother the wind-up bird. Every day it
would come to the stand of trees in our neighborhood and wind the spring
of our quiet little world.” (8-9) Toru even assigns himself the nickname
when May Kasahara wants something easier to call him. However, except
for the disappearance of his cat, Toru’s world is intact during this time.
Nothing that unusual has happened to him yet to cause him to regard the
bird differently. In comparison to the statue of the bird in the yard of the
jinxed house who Toru thinks looks as if it wants to escape, the wind-up
bird is bringing a new day with its creak.
However, closer to the end of Book One as Toru wrestles with never
really knowing Kumiko, and fitting his newly strange encounters with Malta
and Creta, as well as May into his world, his perception of the wind-up bird
begins to change: “…the more this world that enveloped me seemed to
overflow with things and people that could only be called strange. They had
been there all the while waiting in the shadows for me to stop moving. And

35
every time the wind-up bird came to my yard to wind its spring, the world
descended more deeply into chaos.” (125) The meaning of the wind-up bird
can be seen here in more than one way. It could be that Toru’s world is
descending more deeply into chaos every day simply because of the events
in his life which are out of his control. The appearance of the wind-up bird
is only marking the passage of time in this interpretation. Another possible
meaning is that the wind-up bird itself is the cause of the chaos in Toru’s
life, bringing more disorder with each passing day. The answer is not clear,
either to Toru or the reader. After Kumiko’s disappearance, Toru realizes
he hasn’t heard the bird for several days and speculates that it could be a
seasonal bird and has migrated. Its season is over and it has departed, just
as his season of normalcy with Kumiko has ended.
When May traps Toru in the bottom of the well, he feels his conscious
mind begin to slip away. Toru says, “I saw myself as the wind-up bird, flying
through the summer sky, lighting on the branch of a huge tree somewhere,
winding the world’s spring. If there really was no more wind-up bird,
someone would have to take on its duties.” (256) Then, Toru attempts to
imitate the cry of the wind-up bird, but he can only produce “a meaningless,
ugly sound.” He concludes that “only the real wind-up bird could wind the
world’s spring the way it was supposed to be wound.” (256) This is
reminiscent of another famous literary bird, Hans Christian Andersen’s
The Nightingale. In the fairy tale, only the real nightingale can save the

36
emperor from death with its beautiful song. The mechanical bird created in
its likeness has no similar power. After rescuing the emperor from death,
all the nightingale asks is, “Let no one know you have a little bird who tells
you everything. It will be much better so.” (32-33) So, after enjoying
pretending to be the wind-up bird himself, Toru realizes that “there was
something I had to accomplish down here in the darkness at the bottom of
the well. I stopped being the wind-up bird and returned to being myself.”
(257)
After his overextended stay in the darkness of the well, Toru becomes
more out of touch with reality. He tries to imagine what the light looked like
in the afternoon and picture himself in that light. But when he hears
nothing, he imagines that “maybe, while I was down there in the well, the
wind-up bird had not wound the spring, and the world had stopped moving.
Bit by bit, the spring had run down, and at one certain point in time, all
movement—the rivers’ flow, the stirring of leaves, birds flying through the
sky—had stopped.” (268) Here Toru equates the wind-up bird with a life
force without which, not only his world, but the whole world stops moving.
The real or imagined wind-up bird is not exclusive to Toru and
Kumiko. In Book Three: The Birdcatcher, the wind-up bird is heard by a
young boy later known to Toru as Cinnamon. He wakes in the middle of the
night to the cry of a bird that sounds like someone winding a spring. The
sound is coming from the pine tree in his yard and when he looks out the

37
window, nothing has its usual friendly appearance. The full moon bathes
the yard in light, but this light has the opposite effect of the sunlight
Mamiya experiences in his well. In this unnatural light, even “the stones in
the garden looked whiter and smoother than they ordinarily did, staring up
at the sky impassively like the faces of dead people.” (357) The bird winds
its spring several times in a row and the boy watches two men out at the
base of the tree. The shorter man, who reminds the boy of his father, climbs
the tree, and never comes back down. The boy imagines that “everything
was bathed in the white, unreal light of the moon, the yard like the wet
bottom of a sea from which the water has just been suddenly removed.”
(359) This image suggests the emptiness at the bottom of a dry well, where
there is no flow.
The taller man loudly digs a hole at its base and takes out a small
object. Just then, “the wind-up bird cried out, winding an even bigger
spring than before: Creeeak. Creeak. The boy felt intuitively that something
very important was about to happen.” (361) He feels he is the only person
alive who can hear these sounds. The man buries the bundle under the tree,
“and the wind-up bird never cried again.” (361) And after this time,
Cinnamon was never able to speak again. So, instead of being a lifeaffirming force, the wind-up bird is a malevolent one for Cinnamon. The
appearance of the bird coincides with a nightmare-like scene for the small
boy which is mysteriously connected to him losing his voice. Also,

38
Cinnamon never connects the sound of the bird winding a spring to the
passage of time. To Toru, the wind-up bird is always winding the spring of
the day, as if it was responsible for making the day happen. Without the
wind-up bird, the spring would run down, and as in a clock, time would
figuratively and literally stop.
The wind-up bird appears next to an unnamed young soldier involved
in the Hsin-ching zoo massacre of 1945. In anticipation of the occupation of
the city by the Soviet army, a group of soldiers is dispatched to the zoo to
liquidate the animals that will no longer be able to be fed. They are
accompanied on their grim task by the zoo’s veterinarian, who happens to
be Cinnamon’s grandfather and Nutmeg’s father. Nutmeg was not present
for this event and never saw her father again after she and her mother were
evacuated from Manchuria back to Japan. Yet, she is able to see or imagine
these events very clearly and tells them to Toru with the authority of truth.
She “sees” the Japanese soldiers shooting at the caged animals. The
brutality of the scene is expressed in beautiful and powerful images: “The
summer sky was blue, and from the surrounding trees the screams of
cicadas rained down like a sudden shower. The soldiers never spoke. The
blood was gone from their sunburned faces, which made them look like
pictures painted on ancient urns.” (398)
When the soldiers fire into the tigers’ cage, “the animals held their
breath. Even the cicadas stopped crying.” (402) The young unnamed soldier

39
is sent into the cage to see if they are dead and amid the horror there he
hears, “one cicada, then another, began to cry again, as if finally revived.
Soon their cries were joined by those of a bird—strangely distinctive cries,
like the winding of a spring: Creeak. Creeak.” (403) The soldier continues to
hear the unknown bird with the insistent call winding its spring. After more
horrifying scenes of senseless destruction and all the animals are dead, “the
zoo took on the hollow quality of a house emptied of furniture,” (409) a
recurring image used throughout the book. And, the wind-up bird was no
longer calling.
When Toru interrupts her story to ask about the wind-up bird,
Nutmeg doesn’t remember mentioning it. That is because it is part of her
unconscious mind, the part that is able to see what happened despite not
being present and to know that the unnamed soldier would die two years
later after being beaten to death in a Russian mine. It is not part of her
conscious self and does not live on the surface, like usual memories.
Here is another example of the importance of a shared story. One
immediate connection for Toru is that Nutmeg’s father also bears the
mysterious blue-black mark on his right cheek, the size and shape of a
baby’s palm, just as he now does after passing through the wall in the well.
However, from Nutmeg’s story, it doesn’t appear that her father’s mark
confers any special healing power upon him, as it does for Toru. The
veterinarian doesn’t even hear the cry of the wind-up bird as Toru does,

40
only the unnamed soldier does. Also, Nutmeg’s story seems to confirm the
existence of the wind-up bird in another time and place.
The unnamed soldier and the wind-up bird appear again, this time in
a story told not by Nutmeg, but by her son Cinnamon in “The Wind-Up Bird
Chronicle, #8,” a computer file he allows Toru to access. This tells the
veterinarian’s story of the day after the zoo massacre. Now the veterinarian
is asked to accompany the Japanese soldiers as they force four Chinese
prisoners, dressed in baseball uniforms to dig a hole and bury four of their
murdered comrades. After this, the corporal in charge gives the order for
his men to bayonet three of the Chinese prisoners, so as not to waste any
ammunition. Specific instructions about the proper way to kill someone
with a bayonet by scrambling their internal organs, along with the horror of
watching this being carried out, makes the veterinarian feel as if he was
being split in two. “He became simultaneously the stabber and the
stabbed.” (516)
Next the final prisoner, who was the ringleader of the opposition, is to
be killed with the bat he used to murder two Japanese instructors. The
young unnamed soldier is assigned and completes this task. Cinnamon’s
grandfather is asked to ascertain whether the man is dead, and in doing so,
is pulled into the hole by the just about dead man, who is then shot in the
head. The young unnamed soldier is stupefied, and still gripping the bat.
He seemed to be watching the scene, but was actually listening to the wind-

41
up bird making the creeeak, creeak sound as if winding a spring. As he
listened to the winding of the spring, the soldier saw “one fragmentary
image after another rise up before him and fade away.” He is able to see the
future lives and deaths of both the corporal and the veterinarian, but is not
able to see his own future. He remembers the ocean, the bat finally falls to
the ground, and “the wind-up bird went on crying, but no one else could
hear its call.” This is the end of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, #8.
There is another important connection for Toru in this story. The
unnamed soldier is ordered to kill the prisoner with a baseball bat, which
prefigures the man with the guitar case who attacks Toru with a bat and the
bat Toru will use later in room 208 to kill his nemesis. Just as in his story,
the veterinarian feels he became both the stabber and the stabbed, so does
Toru become the user and victim of another baseball bat.
This same man with the guitar case and baseball bat is also the man
Toru sees for the first time in a bar on the night of Kumiko’s abortion. He is
on stage performing an experiment to see if people really do understand
someone else’s pain and suffering. He wants the audience to experience “a
simpler, more physical kind of empathy.” He holds his left hand over a
lighted candle and slowly brings the palm closer and closer to the flame,
clearly burning it. He wants the audience to feel his pain as if it were their
own, because that is the power of empathy. When Toru emerges from the
well after passing through the wall, he has the same blue-black palm print

42
on his right cheek that the veterinarian does. Toru’s mark allows him to
become a healer and help his women clients regain their balance and core
when they symbolically make love to it. Jay Rubin has speculated that
Toru’s mark is the hand of their aborted child, but I think it could also be
thought of as the burned left hand of the man with the guitar case who is
trying to teach the power of empathy. It’s as if his left hand somehow
reached out and touched Toru’s right cheek and transferred that power of
empathy to him, which he then uses to help woman regain their balance.
Toru speculates on whether the veterinarian actually had the same mark, or
was it another detail that had somehow crossed into another story. He
concludes that “everything was intertwined, with the complexity of a threedimensional puzzle—a puzzle in which truth was not necessarily fact and
fact was not necessarily truth.” (527)
Toru acts as the reader in the next chapter and analyzes both the
meaning of the wind-up bird as well as the importance of the story told in
Chronicle #8. After questioning why Cinnamon had written the story and
how much of it could be true, Toru knows conclusively what he was looking
for in his writing: Cinnamon “was engaged in a serious search for the
meaning of his own existence. And he was hoping to find it by looking into
the events that had preceded his birth.” (525) The only way Cinnamon could
fill in the blanks in his past is to invent new stories using stories told by his
mother as material. In this way, he is attempting to understand the

43
grandfather he would never know, but who he feels must be important in
understanding himself. From his mother, he inherits the assumption that
“fact may not be truth, and truth may not be factual.” (525) He is trying to
know what his grandfather might have done, since he will never know for
certain what he actually did.
This appears to be Murakami’s goal in writing. Just like Cinnamon, he
is engaged in a serious search for meaning. Just like Cinnamon, he is trying
to realize this meaning by the telling of stories, which might or might not be
true, but will nonetheless reveal truth in their telling. Attempting to
understand another by listening to or telling or even imagining their story
is the best we can hope for. The accretion of information gained in this
process are the clues man can use to shine more than the cigarette lighter
Toru imagined using to search in one dark corner of the vast room that is
Kumiko. We cannot hope to achieve complete understanding, even of
ourselves, but like a detective, must use these clues to achieve partial
wisdom.
Toru feels the presence of the wind-up bird in Cinnamon’s and
Nutmeg’s stories might have “eaten its way into it on an unconscious level.”
(525) He knows that stories do not always exist in one permanent state, but
can change when told and retold. In their two stories, the wind-up bird
“was audible only to certain special people, who were guided by it toward
inescapable ruin. The will of human beings meant nothing, then, as the

44
veterinarian always seemed to feel. People were no more than dolls set on
tabletops, the springs in their backs wound up tight, dolls set to move in
ways they could not choose, moving in directions they could not choose.
Nearly all within range of the wind-up bird’s cry were ruined, lost. Most of
them died, plunging over the edge of the table.” (526) In these two stories,
the wind-up bird is far from life-affirming. It acts as a warning that, as Toru
felt earlier, chaos was descending into his world. And here the warning
comes with the message that one cannot escape this chaos because we are
nothing more than wind-up dolls moving without free will. The unanswered
question is whether the wind-up bird is winding the springs in our backs,
instead of winding the day as Toru imagines.

The Core

45

The attempt to reach the core of our existence is a central theme in
The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle. When Toru first realizes that at present he is
only able to perceive a very small portion of the whole that is Kumiko, it
occurs to him that he had “found my way to the core of the problem.” (31) In
their turn, most of the characters spend considerable time searching for
and trying to understand this most fundamental part of our being.
When she first meets Toru, May Kasahara tells him that she wishes
she had a scalpel so she could cut into a corpse and find “the lump of death.
I’m sure there must be something like that. Something round and squishy,
like a softball, with a hard little core of dead nerves.” (20) She believes that
the deeper you go inside, the harder it gets, until you reach this tiny core.
Toru doesn’t learn until much later about May’s accident, but obviously the
death of her boyfriend has triggered in her a desire to understand what
resides at the core of one’s life. Usually the soul is thought of as an
intangible presence, but May is hoping for an actual physical presence she
could examine and therefore understand. Sadly, this knowledge does not
come that easily.
Mamiya has had more time but less success in attempting to grasp the
core of experience. He tells Toru in one of his letters that he was able to
achieve a heightened state of consciousness in the well. When the light
shone down on him for a few seconds, it allowed him “to descend directly

46
into a place that might be called the very core of my consciousness.” (208) It
feels like something that possesses life, but Mamiya cannot make out its
form. He is never able to achieve true understanding of the life force he felt
there, and the disappointment and despair he feels because of this has
ruined his life. He feels “his life was lost.” “The heat emitted by that
revelation or grace had seared away the very core of the life that made me
the person I was.” (209) Without the stability the possession of the core
confers, Mamiya feels like an empty shell.
Creta Kano tells Toru the story of the actual removal of her core by
Noburo. It occurs during a sexual encounter when Creta is still working as a
prostitute. Noburo appears to be searching for something as he examines
her body with his fingers. He puts something inside her from behind and
she feels an intense pain “was writhing as much in pleasure as in pain. The
pleasure and pain were one.” (301) Creta feels as if her flesh were splitting
in two when suddenly from between “the split halves of my physical self
came crawling a thing I had never seen or touched before…it was as wet and
slippery as a newborn baby…It had always been inside me, and yet it was
something of which I had no knowledge. This man had drawn it out of me.”
(301)
Creta feels as if the pain “was prying open the lid of my
consciousness…that every screw in my body had not only come loose but
had fallen out.” (301) She feels as if her very self is spilling out, but she can’t

47
prevent it. Later she realizes that she had become a new person, as if she
“found myself in a whole new container.” (304) She feels that “at the same
time that I was entirely new, I was almost entirely empty. I had to fill in that
blank, little by little. One by one, with my own hands, I had to make this
thing I called ‘I’—or rather, make the things that constituted me.” (305)
May later goes down into the well herself and tells Toru that she feels
something inside her body growing like the roots of a tree. When it got
larger, it would break her apart. She is able to contain it when under the
sun, but in the darkness of the well it grew quickly and was uncontrollable.
May concludes that, “Everybody’s born with some different thing at the core
of their existence. And that thing becomes like a heat source that runs each
person from the inside.” (322) She explains that on the day of her accident,
she wanted to trick her core into coming out of her so she could crush it.
That didn’t happen, and now “the world looks totally empty…everything I
see looks fake. The only thing that isn’t fake is that gooshy thing inside me.”
In these very different views of the core and different character’s
attempts to comprehend its essence, Murakami is showing that what he
calls the core is unique and individual in everyone. Its loss ruins Mamiya’s
life. Even though she has been sexually defiled by Noburu which somehow
displaces her former self, Creta is working on making a new better self. May
is trying to find the core so she might control the pain it is causing her.

48
The removal, displacement, or absence of the core causes a crisis
within the self. The core comprises the two different parts of the self, both
necessary to form one whole. Matthew Strecher explains, “Identity for
Murakami is always a combination of two primary elements: the conscious
self and the unconscious other…The relationship between these sides is a
symbiotic one, both are necessary for the construction of a solid identity.
The two are virtual opposites, yet neither can stand alone.” (readers guide,
42) This core identity may be as simple as what we think of as the heart and
soul of an individual.
When Toru passes through the wall in the well and crosses from his
conscious to unconscious self, he watches a television screen in the hotel
lobby that tells of Noburo Wataya’s critical condition after being beaten
with a baseball bat by an assailant who fits Toru’s description. He escapes
from Noburo’s fans who chase him through the hotel until he gets to room
208. He realizes for the first time that the telephone woman who waits
there for him is Kumiko’s alter ego. This is the part of her that remained
after Noburo disrupted her core, as he had done with her sister and Creta.
Toru guesses that Noburo is using his power through the medium of
television and other media to “bring out something that the great mass of
people keep hidden in the darkness of their unconscious. It’s a
tremendously dangerous thing he’s trying to draw out: it’s fatally smeared
with violence and blood, and it’s directly connected to the darkest depths of

49
history, because its final effect is to destroy and obliterate people on a
massive scale.” (579)
As in all true romances, Toru tells Kumiko that he’s going to take her
home, “to the world where you belong, where cats with bent tails live, and
there are little backyards, and alarm clocks ring in the morning.” And he’s
going to do it, “the way they do in the fairy tales, by breaking the spell.”
(580) Toru battles with Noburo, using his baseball bat that is already
covered with Noburo’s brain matter, as if it had also crossed from the
conscious world to the unconscious to kill him twice. Just as the young
soldier does in the zoo, Toru swings and kills Noburo. Toru realizes that he
is passing through the wall and finds himself once again in the well.
For the first time, Toru’s well is filling with water. He realizes that his
actions in room 208 have somehow loosened whatever was obstructing the
flow. He also realizes that he has real knife cuts made by Noburo in their
other unreal world. Toru blacks out, but is saved from drowning in the well
by Cinnamon. Nutmeg tells Toru that Noburo has collapsed and is not
expected to recover, so he is not responsible for his death. However, at the
same time Toru knows that he did kill something inside Noburo’s core that
led to his physical death in the real world.
While the final chapter does definitely establish that Kumiko kills the
incapacitated Noboru Wataya and is arrested, there are no easy answers

50
about the future now that the antagonist has been defeated. The possibility
of Toru and Kumiko reconnecting is certainly possible now that Noboru's
influence is gone. Also, Kumiko does seem to hint at the continued
possibility of a relationship in her last message to Toru when she talks
about stories to tell him and uses the pronoun “we.” However, there are no
certainties about a host of other issues that stand in the way of such a
reconciliation. Kumiko still has to recover from her defilement and
discover her own self while also dealing with her trial and prison time. Toru
not only has to endure an indeterminate amount of waiting for an uncertain
future with Kumiko, but also has to come to terms with all of his newfound
knowledge about his wife and himself. Just as the stories told to Toru are
often incomplete narratives that nevertheless play a crucial role by pointing
out overlooked details and unusual ideas, The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle is
only a partial answer to such deeper questions.

Nutmeg and Cinnamon

51

The stories and narrative of Nutmeg Akasaka and her son Cinnamon
play a crucial role not only in Toru's journey but in the wider meaning and
context of the novel itself. Not only do Nutmeg and Cinnamon provide Toru
with the necessary resources and information to pursue his goal, but their
stories provide a context and a wider perspective that would be otherwise
absent if we only had Toru’s narrative to go on. Therefore, Nutmeg and
Cinnamon’s stories both embody or exemplify the central act of storytelling
throughout the book, and mirror and expand Toru’s story.
Nutmeg herself has some parallel connection with Toru, as they both
share the same capability to connect and heal others, though she does not
have the same physical manifestation that he does. She is also haunted by
the violent removal of those whom she loves. On the other hand, Cinnamon
is in some ways an alternate version of Toru: what could have happened if
he had lost his ability to create and tell his own story.
Nutmeg, aside from serving as Toru's real-world ally, tells him several
nested stories that are vitally interconnected with Toru's own journey. Thus
she is also his “other-world” ally in Toru’s search for meaning. The four
critical narratives that Nutmeg and Cinnamon share with Toru are the story
of the bloody zoo massacre (interwoven with the tale of her own escape
from an American submarine at the same time), the story of her own
journey through life from her childhood to the present, the story of how
Cinnamon lost his voice, and the story of the brutal baseball team massacre.

These stories were slowly built up over time not merely from Nutmeg’s own
tales but from Cinnamon’s

52
collaboration as well. Nutmeg explains the origin of the stories as an
organic, mythic collaboration:
Whenever I told it to him, Cinnamon would ask me to tell him some
other little story contained in the main story. He wanted to know
about a different branch of the same tree…In this way, the two of us
went on to create our own interlocking system of myths…There was
no end to any of this. There were always more details that could be
filled in, and the story kept growing deeper and deeper and bigger and
bigger. (444)

Murakami later repeats the central importance of the way in which
mother and son collaborate in shaping reality within their joint story which
takes on epic dimensions: “This story jointly possessed by mother and son
might not exist in a single fixed form, but could go on taking in changes and
growing as a story does in oral transmission.” (525)
This process of mythologizing and “creative” storytelling is not some
dim historical exercise but a vital and powerful part of Nutmeg and
Cinnamon's lives. Not only do these stories give them a common bond that
no one else but Toru can share with them, but they also have the power to
critically help or hurt others - even the storytellers themselves. As Nutmeg

tries to explain Cinnamon's inability to speak to Toru, she tells him that her
theory is that “his words were lost in the labyrinth, swallowed up by the
world of the stories. Something that came out of those stories snatched his
tongue away. And a few years later, the same thing killed my husband.”
(444)
Yet regardless of the danger of giving weight to stories of such dark and

53
terrible events, both Murakami and his characters are vitally aware of the
necessity of telling such stories. Matthew Stretcher notes that Murakami,
while he does not feel beholden to a particular literary tradition, does feel
that
“his responsibility lies in meeting the new challenge that all writers face: in
producing stories that impress readers sufficiently to make them look at
their own lives, and apply what they take from the pages of the story to their
own experiences, not on the intellectual level but on a deeply empathetic,
emotional one.” (Readers Guide 21)
Although Nutmeg's stories provide parallel comparative experiences
for understanding Toru, her manner of storytelling is very dissimilar to
Toru/Murakami's approach to storytelling. Nutmeg's storytelling method
provides a contrast or counterpoint to Toru's simple and precise narrative
voice and his attempts to place his narrative in time and space, and
chronicle his experience in a plain style. Toru describes her style in this
way:

Nutmeg’s storytelling turned out to be far more lengthy and
convoluted than mine. And also, unlike me, she would impose no
order on her stories but would leap from topic to topic as her feelings
dictated. Without explanation, she would reverse chronological order
or suddenly introduce as a major character someone she had never
mentioned to me before. In order to know to which period of her life
the fragment belonged that she was presently narrating, it was
necessary to make careful deductions, though no amount of
deduction would work in some cases. She would narrate events she
had witnessed with her own eyes, as well as events that she had never
witnessed. (407)

54

In a similar way, both the content and style of Cinnamon’s stories
provide not only contrast and counterpoint, but also ultimately enrich
Toru’s tale. At the outset Toru wonders of Cinnamon: “What kind of being
could possibly lie beneath that perfect exterior?” (439) Even though
Cinnamon can not or will not speak, Toru imagines that he may be speaking
with his hands:
The moving fingers were perhaps no more than a decorative façade,
and I was half-consciously watching some other aspect of the building
behind it. I would try to catch sight of the boundary between the
façade and the background whenever we chatted across the breakfast

table, but I could never quite mange to see it, as if any line that might
have marked the border between the two kept moving and changing
its shape. (441)

As far as content, The Wind-Up Bird Chronicles are not only Toru's,
but Cinnamon's. Through his digital world, Cinnamon finds the voice that
his earthly self was cut off from in childhood. Though he lost his voice in the
stories he has mythologized, his storytelling abilities survive within the
digital world where he is still boldly talking. Before Toru guesses the
passwords and gains access to the labyrinthine computer containing the
titular stories, Toru correctly guesses that Cinnamon kept something more
than just the secret documents of his mother's business on the computer.
Toru sees Cinnamon in his office with the computer where the stories are
later found and observes that:
He and his computer seemed to be moving together in an almost
erotic union. After a burst of strokes on the keyboard, he would gaze
at the
55
screen, his mouth twisted in apparent dissatisfaction or curled with
the suggestion of a smile. Sometimes he seemed deep in thought as he
touched one key, then another, then another; and sometimes he ran
his fingers over the keys with all the energy of a pianist playing a Liszt
etude. As he engaged in silent conversation with his machine, he
seemed to be peering through the screen of his monitor into another

world, with which he shared a special intimacy. I couldn't help but
feel that reality resided for him not so much in the earthly world but
in his subterranean labyrinth. Perhaps in that world Cinnamon had a
clear, ringing voice, with which he spoke eloquently and laughed and
cried aloud. (467)
Cinnamon is not just a commanding storyteller – he is “the absolute
ruler over this three-dimensional subterranean labyrinth (466).”
Cinnamon's power over this personal subterranean world mirrors the
control that Toru eventually discovers he can exert on his own
subterranean labyrinth within the well. Both Toru and Cinnamon, as Mr.
Honda says earlier in the book, belong to a world beneath the world the rest
of us inhabit. Their propensity to storytelling is in some way related to the
depths that they are accustomed to plumbing. Only the bright illumination
and bravery provided by passionate stories and myths can attempt to
illuminate their path in such a dark and perplexing realm.
Jay Rubin provides additional insight into how important a character
Cinnamon must be for Murakami: “For a time in Murakami’s Tokyo office
used to find the name ‘Cinnamon’ on his mail-box, and a variation on the
name was part of the office e-mail address.” (222)
Amongst a cast of characters who largely believe in some sort of fate
or

56
destiny rather than absolute free will, Nutmeg seems to be particularly

fatalistic. Even when describing her father's outlook on the world, Nutmeg's
belief in a lack of free will pervades the words she gives to the fictional
version of her father. After witnessing the awkward and bloody slaughter of
the starving and abandoned zoo animals, Nutmeg's father lies down in the
grass and ponders how the sad fate of the animals will be quickly outpaced
by the brutal and practical reality of the hungry locals slaughtering the dead
animals for food. In a very Toru-like statement, Nutmeg's father says “that's
reality for you: quick and efficient.” In the same way, while considering the
grasshoppers near him in the grass, Nutmeg’s father observes that: “Maybe
the world was like a revolving door, it occurred to him as his consciousness
was fading away. And which section you ended up in was just a matter of
where your foot happened to fall…there was no logical continuity from one
section to another. And it was precisely because of this lack of logical
continuity that choices really didn’t mean much.” (411)
Indeed, this is exactly the same opinion that Nutmeg herself expresses
about her own life in a later passage. Every strange event in the course of
her life seems to Nutmeg to have been “ingeniously programmed from the
start for the very purpose of bringing me here, where I am today.” (503). In
language that also mirrors the description of Toru and Malta acting as
empty conduits, Nutmeg describes herself feeling “as if my every move is
being controlled by some kind of incredibly long am that’s reaching out
from somewhere far away, and that my life has been nothing more than a
convenient passageway for all these things moving through it.” (503)
Although different characters are more or less

57
successful in going with the “flow,” this willingness to open oneself to the
vagaries of life's journey and follow one's instincts towards some sort of
conclusion is one of the book’s major, central themes. The importance of
being in tune with the flow – a word mentioned very frequently and
significantly throughout the text – is reinforced through Nutmeg's story of
her father. The father, who shares the strange purplish mark with Toru,
also understands the advice that Toru got from Honda: “At times he had no
choice but to abandon everything and give himself up to the flow.” (509).
Some of the characters in Cinnamon and Nutmeg’s stories also mirror
and/or provide additional meaning to the overall story of the whole book.
Thus the young soldier in Cinnamon’s story about the “clumsy” zoo
massacre also hears the wind-up bird and, like many other characters, such
as Honda and Creta Kano, has some limited insight into the fate of other
people. The poor soldier who can hear the wind-up bird sees “one
fragmentary image after another rise up before him and fade away.” (521)
He can see the fates of all those there, except his own. As a relatively quiet
young man struggling to find his place in the world who is somehow cut off
from some part of themselves because of nefarious events that are
foreshadowed by the appearance of the wind-up bird, the soldier is very
much like Cinnamon. For him also, hearing the wind-up bird’s call appears
to offer no escape from cruel fate.

History and War

58

Throughout The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, the narrative regularly and
rapidly shifts between the present and the past. Scenes of Toru’s very
contemporary Tokyo alternate with scenes from Japan’s past in Manchuria.
However, such frenetic scene shifting is no more unsettling than the
unusual subject matter of TWBC that, to Murakami’s credit, becomes more
natural and normal as the reader is slowly drawn into Toru’s world.
Obviously Murakami has an important reason for making these stories
from Japan’s past such an integral part of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle. As
with many other elements of his fiction, these reasons are varied and open
to interpretation. Michiko Kakutani, in her review of the novel in The New
York Times, thinks that Murakami is not only chronicling his hero’s efforts
to achieve understanding, but “also aspires to examine Japan’s burden of
historical guilt and place in a post-World War II world. The mechanical cry
of the wind-up bird that the book’s hero sporadically hears is the sound of
history winding its spring, the setting into motion of events that will
reverberate through public and private lives.”
In a Salon interview with Laura Miller, Murakami explains his use of
history in The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle: “I have drawers in my mind, so any
drawers…I take out the memories and images that I need. The war is a big
drawer to me, a big one…My father told me stories (about the war), not so
many, but it meant a lot to me.” Also, while writing Book Three, Murakami
was asked in an interview why his generation should take responsibility for

59
a war which ended before they were born. He replied: “When I read about
the atrocities in China, I can’t believe it. It’s so stupid and absurd and
meaningless. That was the generation of my father and grandfather. I want
to know what drove them to do those kinds of things…I want to understand,
but I don’t.” (qtd. in Rubin 215) Rather than relying only on actual historical
accounts, and in much the same way as his characters do, Murakami will
tell stories about the war to try and make sense of it.
Koyama writes that Murakami frequently attended the Aum trials and
observed cult members who had merely obeyed cult leader Shoko Asajara’s
order to spray sarin. Through this experience, he “seriously thought about
World War II. During the war, no one could say ‘No’ to senior officers’
orders to kill prisoners of war. The Japanese did such things in the war. I
think the Japanese have yet to undertake soul-searching.”
As we have seen, The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle is so much more than
an unusual take on detective fiction or a modern quest for a lost love. In an
article in New York Magazine, Luc Sante calls the novel epic and perhaps
an allegory of Japanese nationalism, ambivalence and guilt. What makes it
epic in scope is Murakami’s attempt to relate Japan’s present with its past
in the guise of unusual characters from both these time periods.
As he does with the wind-up bird, Murakami’s first introduction of
the relation of the past to the present is gentle and innocuous. A young Toru

60
and Kumiko visit the elderly, hard of hearing Mr. Honda. Their visits are
light-hearted, almost comical as the charming, Yoda-like Mr. Honda, whose
face lights up at the sake they bring him, examines the phlegm in his tissue
as if hoping to make a divination. However, as in everything else in the
book, there is both wisdom and menace just below the surface of reality.
Mr. Honda’s has explicit warning for Toru to beware of water and mindful
of not resisting the flow. Mr. Honda tells Toru that if he resists the flow,
“everything dries up. If everything dries up, the world is darkness,” and
that there may be a time when he has to go to the bottom of the deepest well
he can find. In retrospect, of course, Honda has told Toru and us the
essence of everything that is to come, and everything Toru needs to know.
Mr. Honda also relates the story of the battle of Nomonhan, his role in
it, and its place in Japanese history. He tells Toru that Nomonhan was a
great embarrassment for the Imperial Army, so they sent the survivors
where they were most likely to be killed. This is the first of many examples
of the state using the individual as a tool or pawn in their game with no
regard for their life or its worth. Afterward, Toru is able to imagine the
battle in detail and in terminology that mirrors central themes in the book:
“I kept thinking about the Nomonhan battlefield after Kumiko fell asleep.
The soldiers were all asleep there. The sky overhead was filled with stars
and millions of crickets were chirping. I could hear the river. I fell asleep
listening to it flow.” (55) Right from the start, Murakami shows Toru able to

61
closely identify with a part of the past he seems to have no connection to. In
one of his cryptic haiku, Mr. Honda also gives voice to this: “‘I am he
and/He is me:/Spring nightfall.’ Abandon the self, and there you are.” (51)
Mr. Honda is reminding Toru that we are interchangeable, parts of each
other’s whole and when you can abandon yourself, perhaps you will also
find yourself.
Toru hears the beginning of a major story from the past on the same
day that Kumiko leaves him, which is the beginning of a new story in his
own life. Toru is visited by Lieutenant Mamiya who has come to bring him a
remembrance left to him by his friend Mr. Honda upon his death. Toru
honestly wants to hear the story of how he and Mr. Honda met. Mamiya
begins his long tale describing their involvement in Manchuria in 1938.
Mamiya, Mr. Honda, and a sergeant Hamano are assigned to accompany a
high level officer, Yamamoto, on an intelligence mission to cross the border
near the Khalkha River. Hamano was assigned to the group because he was
big and fearless. Mr. Honda, however, is a gentle, quiet soul whose
apparent value for this mission is not clear. Mamiya describes him as
“utterly serene.” Mamiya specializes in geography and is there to make a
map of the difficult terrain.
It is interesting that Mamiya is a topographer and this mission
involves crossing and re-crossing dangerous borders since he is doing
literally what Toru later does figuratively. While Mamiya is actually

62
crossing and trying to chart a dangerous land border, Toru later crosses the
dangerous border between his conscious and unconscious mind, between
the life he knows on the surface of reality and the deeper one he discovers
in the well.
Matthew Strecher believes that “the purpose of Mamiya’s narrative is
to provide a historical pattern, a narrative ancestor, to the situation in
which Toru finds himself in the present.” (Reader’s Guide 34) In addition to
this, Toru and Mamiya are related in other ways. They both have similar
personalities. Things happen to them, rather than being initiated by them.
Mamiya has to confront his nemesis, the much more powerful Boris, and
fails. He loses everything but his life and suffers from Boris’s curse of never
being happy or loved, making his gift of long life go unappreciated. His only
solace is in telling his story to Toru, not really knowing if it will help him in
any way. In contrast, although Toru has to confront Noburo Wataya, his
much more powerful nemesis, he at least achieves a limited success in
vanquishing his foe. Whether it will be enough to save Kumiko remains
unanswered.
Jay Rubin believes that Murakami associates Noburo’s political
success and power with “the authoritarian tradition of the Japanese
government responsible for the murder of thousands of Chinese, the
sacrifice of millions of Japanese in the war, and for suppressing the student
idealism of the late 1960’s, leading to the boredom and overwork of the

63
consumer culture that dominates modern Japan.” (211) The malaise of
Japan’s past has been inherited by its present, perhaps no more so than
during the very materialistic mid-80’s in which WUBC takes place. Rubin
sees 1980’s Japan as “a vacant, stagnant, dissatisfying decade, just beneath
the surface of which lurks a violent history.” (213) The conformism believed
necessary to achieve success in modern Japan is too restrictive and limiting
and should be resisted for any real individual growth. In a very small way,
Toru does resist these norms first by choosing a job with no clear career
goals, and then leaving it to decide what to do next.
In an article about Murakami, Sam North writes about how
“alienation is key to Murakami’s books and from them one comes to
understand Japan a little better. Externally we see a nation conforming in
dress and looks and attitudes…There appears to us to be a national will to
conform and that is why Murakami’s characters seem so strange and yet so
popular with the Japanese.” An ordinary character like Toru who can’t fit in
and struggles to find out what the meaning of his life therefore becomes a
modern anti-hero.
While reading a library book about Manchukuo, Toru comes across a
direct link between Noburo and the past atrocities in Manchuria. He finds
that Noburo’s uncle, Yoshitaka Wataya, was working there for the state.
During this time, he becomes friendly with Kanji Ishiwara, the infamous
ringleader of the Manchurian Incident. The Manchurian Incident was a

64
false Japanese Army attack on their own troops that initiated the fifteen
years of war that was to follow. Noburo’s uncle becomes a devoted admirer
of Ishiwara and later a Diet member and cabinet minister. Noburo actually
inherits his uncle’s seat in the National Diet and Toru feels that now his
political legacy, directly linked to Manchuria, has also been inherited by
Noburo. This adds a historical support for Toru’s instinctive dislike of
Noburo.
This realization leads Toru to reflect on the broad interconnectedness
of life. He feels connected to his clients by the mark on his cheek. The mark
on his cheek connects him somehow to Cinnamon’s grandfather.
Cinnamon’s grandfather and Mamiya are connected by Hsin-ching. Mamiya
and Honda were connected by their mission on the Manchurian-Mongolian
border. Kumiko and Toru are connected to Mr. Honda by the Wataya
family. Mamiya and Toru are joined by their similar experiences in their
respective wells. “All of these were linked as in a circle, at the center of
which stood prewar Manchuria, continental East Asia, and the short war of
1939 in Nomonhan. But why Kumiko and I should have been drawn into
this historical chain of cause and effect I could not comprehend. All of these
events had occurred long before Kumiko and I were born.” (498) Just as in
room 208, the usual “walls” between events and people from the past and
present day experience are broken down, and thus they “flow” into each
other.

65
Matthew Strecher feels that Murakami uses the saga of Mamiya
during the war “to establish the tension between the will of the individual
and the power of the State.” (Reader’s Guide 34) Strecher believes that
Murakami’s chief interest in the past lies in the question of who is truly
responsible for the atrocities of war when one relinquishes their free will
and is acting as an agent of the state. Sergeant Hamano gives the ordinary
soldier’s perspective, complaining that the war they’re fighting now isn’t a
real war, “with a battle line where you face the enemy and fight to the
finish.” (143) Instead they are involved in subterfuge, killing prisoners
because they have no food for them, and killing innocent civilians on order.
In short, it’s a war without a “Righteous Cause. It’s just two sides killing
each other.” (143) The prime directive of the soldier to follow orders thus
becomes more complicated. When the motives behind an order have
become murky and suspect, the will and ability to actually kill another
human being becomes that much more difficult. What are the
consequences of following commands that go against the natural order of
man? For the man who allows himself to ponder this question, one result
would be that you must split yourself into two halves, becoming both the
person you once were and the soldier you are commanded to be. As is seen
later in the text, this splitting of self can often have disastrous effects since
it is not always possible to reintegrate two halves of yourself.

66
In a horrifically gruesome scene, Yamamoto is skinned alive, with
Mamiya as audience, when he refuses to reveal any information to their
captors. Perhaps this scene is here merely to show the brutality man can
achieve when following commands. Perhaps it is meant to be symbolic of
attempting to reveal the truth by peeling back layers, here literally. Or
perhaps the whole episode is just a painful prelude to Mamiya’s time in the
well, which provides Toru with a valuable guidance to achieving
understanding in his quest to regain Kumiko.
However, in another instance of one story bleeding into another, Toru
will later meet the man with the guitar case he had first seen on the night of
Kumiko’s abortion. Toru follows him home at which point his internal
anger about Kumiko is transferred to the man, whom he beats senseless
while the man just smiles and laughs at him. That night Toru dreams about
this man in images which mirror Yamamoto. In his dream, the man with
the guitar case disrobes and starts to peel his own skin as if it were the skin
of an apple, until he turns into the bright-red lump of flesh. In another
instance of one story bleeding into another, this is the exact phrase May
Kasahara always uses to describe the core. However, Toru doesn’t
understand its implications anymore than Mamiya does, and all it shows is
how painful, and sometimes unsuccessful, trying to learn the truth about
someone really can be.

67
Murakami next uses Nutmeg Akasaka to tell a story about Manchuria
in 1945. Although Nutmeg never actually witnessed the events she narrates
in a trance-like state to Toru, she relates the story of her father, the
veterinarian for the Hsin-ching zoo right before the collapse of Manchukuo,
with complete conviction. In anticipation of an occupation, an order is
given to kill all the large animals in the zoo. Just as Sergeant Hamano had
told Mamiya the battle they were engaged in wasn’t for a good and just
cause, the lieutenant in charge here has similar feelings. He’d rather not kill
any animals, but rationalizes that there’s nothing to feed them and this
might be a quicker death. Also, having them escape would be a disaster to
the population. So another officer finds himself being ordered to kill, this
time defenseless animals. This also goes against the natural order.
However, with the cry of the wind-up bird in the background, the orders are
carried out.
Perhaps wanting to show equal opportunity guilt and shame for
actions performed under orders, a third-person narrator relates the story
of a transport ship hoping to escape Manchukuo and return to Japan. The
transport, loaded with unarmed Japanese civilians including Nutmeg and
her mother, becomes involved in a stand-off with an American submarine
that is threatening to commence firing upon them in ten minutes. When
the time is up, one sailor’s movements on the submarine puzzle the
passengers on the transport. “One sailor shook his head from side to side

68
and punched the barrel of the deck gun with a clenched fist. Another took
his helmet off and stared up at the sky. The men’s actions might have been
expressing anger or joy or disappointment or excitement. The passengers
on the transport ship found it impossible to tell what was happening or
what this was leading up to. Like an audience watching a pantomime for
which there was no program (but which contained a very important
message), they held their breaths.” (412) The submarine disappears under
water and only later does it become clear that moments before the attack
was about to begin, the Japanese government telegraphed the Allied powers
that they were going to surrender unconditionally, so the order to attack
was rescinded.
As hard as he is on his own country’s war crimes, Murakami perhaps
included this particular incident to show the universality of man’s
inhumanity to man when they surrender their free will and become agents
of the state. The captain of the American submarine shows no mercy or
concern for the unarmed Japanese civilians aboard the transport he is
about to torpedo. Not privy to his thoughts, he seems prepared to sink their
ship perhaps because he can compartmentalize the reality of killing
innocent civilians since he is under orders to do so and it will somehow be
for the greater good. However, the description of the American sailors on
the deck is very telling in its ambiguity. Is the sailor who shook his head
from side to side and punched the barrel of the deck gun with a clenched

69
fist angry that he is about to be involved in killing a boat full of civilians? Or
is he angry and annoyed that he’s missing the opportunity to do so,
snatched away from the thrill of the kill at the last minute by the Japanese
government’s surrender? Is the sailor who took off his helmet and looked
up at the sky doing so because he’s relieved or looking for guidance from
some higher power. As Murakami tells us, it could be anger or joy or
disappointment or sorrow. It all depends on the individual and how far they
are willing to go to oppose the natural laws of man in following the laws of
the state during war.
Throughout the various trips back into the past, Murakami is showing
us several different reactions. In Mamiya’s story, Boris the Manskinner and
the Mongolians feel no remorse and seem to fully enjoy torturing and
killing. Sergeant Hamano feels the immorality of not fighting a true battle
for important reasons. The lieutenant at the zoo knows it’s wrong to kill the
animals but is able to rationalize so he can carry out commands. We’re left
to speculate about the sailors aboard the submarine. Or does it all come
down to fate, as the veterinarian imagines after the zoo massacre when he
says: “Maybe the world was like a revolving door…and which section you
ended up in was just a matter of where your foot happened to fall…there
was no logical continuity from one section to another. And it was precisely
because of this lack of logical continuity that choices really didn’t mean very
much.” (411) In this sense, perhaps one’s individual experiences would add

70
up collectively to your particular mindset which would determine your
response to killing under command.
Just as these reactions are varied, so are the ways in which Murakami
weaves these stories from the past into the narrative. First, Mr. Honda
introduces them briefly with little detail. Then Mamiya tells Toru of his time
in Manchuria, using actual memories to give the stories finely drawn
details. Next, Nutmeg merely imagines what happened to her father in
Manchuria and relates the stories to Toru in a trance-like state. Now, in a
thoroughly modern twist its characters could never have imagined,
Cinnamon reveals his story about his grandfather to Toru via his computer.
Cinnamon has allowed Toru access to a computer file titled “The
Wind-Up Bird Chronicle,” and chronicle #8 brings the reader back to the
veterinarian the day after the zoo massacre. What is different here is that
Cinnamon is extrapolating from the already imagined stories of his mother
to recreate further tales about his grandfather. Murakami’s path here is
almost like the classic game of telephone. The stories move from pure
memory to imagined memory to an extrapolated memory from that
previous imagining. In playing telephone, or as it is also known, Chinese
whispers, a sentence is passed on from one person to the next, its exact
meaning often changing slightly as it moves down the communication
chain. The point of the game is to see how much the final sentence varies
from the original. However, for Murakami, the factual transfer of

71
information from one person to another via a story wouldn’t matter. As
Toru sees, in Cinnamon’s stories “fact may not be truth, and truth may not
be factual. The question of which parts of a story were factual and which
parts were not was probably not a very important one for Cinnamon.” (525)
What is more important in the stories than knowing what his grandfather
actually did, is imaging what he might have done. This makes the knowledge
gained from a story more important and universal than the actual facts of
what happened. In his way, this is also what Murakami hopes to achieve in
his writing. The stories of Murakami’s novels are not actual truth, but are
written to help him understand himself, as well as to help his readers
achieve a similar understanding.
In a quick change from Cinnamon’s computer, the reader is returned
back to his grandfather on the day after the zoo massacre. The lieutenant is
back with new, even more horrible orders. He has Chinese prisoners dig
their own grave and bury other members of their group before facing their
own death. His orders are not to waste a single bullet, but rather to bayonet
them. He admits to the veterinarian that neither he nor his men have ever
killed anyone that way. But despite how brutal and unnecessary this all is,
they proceed with their orders. Disobeying a direct command never seems a
possibility, even though they are alone and would have no witnesses to
contradict them. But this is what blind and perfect obedience to command
really is. The men can rationalize all they want about why they should

72
follow orders they might disapprove of, as long as they still follow them. But
to think of logical or moral reasons why they should not follow orders is
never considered because this could open the floodgates to all manner of
insubordination, a crime always punishable by death.
To finish off with a final dose of wartime brutality, the lieutenant has
orders that the ringleader of the group is to be beaten to death with the
baseball bat he used to kill two Japanese teachers. He passes this order on
to the young soldier who is the only one who can hear the cries of the windup bird. The young soldier follows his command without question, but right
after hearing the wind-up bird, he can also see the futures of all the major
players involved in these killings. Perhaps it is his sensitivity to the horror
of what he has just done that splits his core so he can temporarily see
beyond the reality of the moment, moving briefly from the conscious to
unconscious mind.
Murakami shifts scenes rapidly here with chapters moving from
Cinnamon’s computer, to a letter from May, and back to Toru’s house
where he finds a letter from Mamiya. Mamiya wants to send Toru the sequel
to his previous story because he feels he should know everything without
concealment. Because of his work in intelligence, Mamiya “knew very well
the bloody history of oppression in Mongolia carried out by Stalin and his
puppet dictators.” (539) Since the revolution he had seen the massacre of
more innocent people. He felt the same way about what the Japanese had

73
done in Manchuria where similar atrocities had occurred. Sent to a
Siberian coal mine to work as an interpreter, Mamiya comes into contact
again with the Russian officer who had ordered Yamamoto skinned alive. A
prisoner himself, Boris uses Mamiya to gain control of the mine. He
pretends that by acting as a go-between, Mamiya will be able to improve
relations for his people.
At this point, Murakami interrupts Mamiya’s story with a chapter
about Toru going back down into the well to return to room 208. Just as
Toru enters room 208, the narrative moves back to Mamiya’s story. Jay
Rubin feels that Murakami has put a new chapter here “so that we will
absorb alternating episodes of the two narratives in what he deems to be
the most effective way. As the apparently unrelated stories appear in
alternate chapters, a relationship takes place in the mind of the reader: the
war becomes part of what Toru finds inside himself.” (219)
By now, Mamiya realizes Boris’s treachery and how he now controls
the prison camp. He makes Mamiya his assistant, trusts him with
overseeing the money he has stolen from the camp, and relies on him
completely. Boris praises Mamiya and explains to him that the only way to
survive is “not to imagine anything. A Russian who uses his imagination is
done for. My job is to make others use their imaginations.” (560) Their
relationship is eerily similar to Andy Dufresne’s with Warden Norton in The
Shawshank Redemption. Sadly, Mamiya never achieves Andy Dufresne’s

74
ultimate payback and redemption. Mamiya’s plan is to kill Boris but when
he finds himself alone with him, but both his attempts fail. Boris knew of
his plan and reminds Mamiya how he warned him never to use his
imagination, as he had done to plan the execution. After failing to kill him,
Boris sends him away with a curse that wherever he may be, he will never
be happy, he will never love anyone or be loved in return.
Just as Mamiya carries Boris’s curse with him, Jay Rubin feels that
“The ‘war’ in TWBC is not presented as a series of historical facts but as an
important part of the psychological baggage of Murakami’s generation and
beyond. For most Japanese, the war exists in the same half-known realm as
Rossini’s opera The Thieving Magpie.” (217) The Thieving Magpie is not
only the title of Book One, but is also the tune the waiter is humming who
leads Toru to room 208. Toru know its famous overture, like everyone else,
but is not well-versed in its story or meaning. Rubin believes “the opera
figures prominently in the book not because its plot provides a key to the
novel but precisely because it is just out of reach, on the periphery of most
people’s consciousness.” (218) The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle is then acting
like an opera program for the war, using stories to help explicate its story
from another time and dialogue told in another language. Mr. Rubin also
states that he actually accompanied Murakami in San Francisco in 1992,
long after he had written Book One of the novel, to buy a video of The

75
Thieving Magpie because he wanted to find out once and for all what it was
about. (218)

Conclusion

76

If there is one thing Haruki Murakami insists on, it is that there are no
neat conclusions allowed in life or in fiction. Of course, the open-ended
nature of Murakami's writing makes attempting to summarize it a difficult
task. His work, particularly The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, is resistant to
interpretation. In this sense, the novel is best summed up by one of Toru’s
own statements (describing how he acted upon his first significant
encounter with Nutmeg):
She did not offer any explanations and I did not ask for them. I simply
did as I was told. This reminded me of several so-called art films I had
seen in college. Movies like that never explained what was going on.
Explanations were rejected as some kind of evil that could destroy the
films’ reality. (380)
Murakami does not explain what he was trying to do in the work, nor does
he give the reader the easy conclusion and resolution of the story that most
come to expect from a novel.
To attempt to truly explicate exactly what The Wind-Up Bird
Chronicle arguably only serves to distract from its true purpose. The novel's
inner mysteries are deliberately half-illuminated in the hopes that the
reader is inspired to connect Murakami's story with their own experiences
and interpret in their own unique way. Murakami himself acknowledged
that his resistance to conclusions is deliberate and influenced by other

77
authors. In an interview with the Paris Review, he responded to a question
about The Wind-Up Bird's shadowy ending by saying:
You’ve read Raymond Chandler, of course. His books don’t really
offer conclusions. He might say, He is the killer, but it doesn’t matter
to me who did it. There was a very interesting episode when Howard
Hawks made a picture of The Big Sleep. Hawks couldn’t understand
who killed the chauffeur, so he called Chandler and asked, and
Chandler answered, I don’t care! Same for me. Conclusion means
nothing at all. I don’t care who the killer is in The Brothers
Karamazov.
The real value and meaning of the book is in its ability to provoke the reader
into considering the same questions that Murakami does from a potentially
new angle, not from any ready-made, one-size-fits-all solutions. Instead,
The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle seems to suggest that every person needs to
search for their own answers, and that sharing these experiences can be a
mutually beneficial exchange of insight and information.
The critical reaction to the novel is mixed in its appraisal of the
ending. Some critics, like Sam North, believe the inconclusive nature is
fitting and appropriate. North says that:
It is stupid of me to think I could explain these books [Murakami's
writing], because to do so is to negate them – only to read them do
you

78
find inner peace and that peace comes at a price because it will
unsettle you, the mask that real life clasps to our faces will slip a little
and you will never again be comfortable. Yet several other critics, like
the New York Times Michiko Kakutani, feel that the novel's
conclusion is simply the product of laziness or an inability to weave
together all of the disparate threads of the work.
Personally, I found that my exploration of Murakami was very close
to North's interpretation. While I don't feel that I have a perfect
understanding of the novel (and I doubt such a thing is completely
possible), I have found that attempting to understand the penetrating
questions at the heart of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle has been enormously
valuable in and of itself. I found it all too easy to see parallels and
comparisons between Toru's world and my world. Despite the surreal
quality of the work and the uniquely Japanese aspects of the story, I found
Murakami's novel to be a poignant and universal examination of what it
means to be a thinking and feeling individual attempting to find one's place
within a complex and bewildering modern society.

Bibliography

Andersen, Hans Christian. The Nightingale. Trans. Eva
Le Gallienne. New York: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1965.
Chilton, Myles. “Realistic Magic and the Invented Tokyos of
Murakami Haruki and Yoshimoto Banana.” Journal of
Narrative Theory 39.3 (2009): 391+.Academic OneFile.
Web.21 Mar.2011. <http://find.galegroup.com.libproxy.
newschool.edu/gtx/infomark.do?&contentSet=IACDocuments&type=retrieve&tabID=T002&prodid=AONE
&docId=A218882466&source=gale&srcprod=AONE&user
GroupName=nysl me newsch&version=1.0>.
Chozick, Matthew Richard. “De-Exoticizing Haruki Murakami’s
Reception.” Project Muse Comparative Literature Studies
Volume 45, Number 1, 2008. <http://muse.jhu.edu.
libproxy.newschool.edu/journals/comparative lit>.
Fisher, Susan. “An Allegory of Return: Murakami Haruki’s
The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle.” Comparative Literature
Studies 37.2 (2000) 155-170. <http.//muse.jhu.edu.
libproxy.newschool.edu/journals/comparative lit>.
James, Jamie. “East Meets West: The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle.”
The New York Times 2 November 1997.
Johnson, J. Douglas. “Springs of Japanese Violence: The
Wind-Up Bird Chronicle.” Far Eastern Economic Review

161.3 (Jan 15, 1998): 40.
Kakutani, Michiko. “On a Nightmarish Trek Through History’s
Web: The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle.” The New York Times
The Books of the Times 31 October 1997.
Koyama, Tetsuro. “Murakami Sees Storytelling as Global
Common Language.” Japan Today. <http://
www.japantoday.com/category/book-reviews/view/
murakami-sees-storytelling-as-global-common-language>.
Matthew, David. “On TheWind-Up Bird Chronicle: Fiction From
A Rising Son.” Infinity Plus. <http://infinityplus.co.uk/
nonfiction/windup.htm>.
Miller, Laura. “The Outsider: The Salon Interview of Haruki
Murakami.” Salon.com. <http://www.salon.com/books/int
1997/12/12/cov_si_16int.html>.
Murakami, Fuminobu. Postmodern, Feminist and PostColonial
Currents in Contemporary Japanese Culture. New York:
Routledge, 2005.
Murakami, Haruki. The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle. Trans. Jay
Rubin. New York: Vintage International, 1998.
Naparstek, Ben. “Not Lost in Translation.” The Sydney Morning
Herald. 24 June 2006. <http://www.smh.com.au/news/
books/not-lost-in-translation /2006/06/22/115084529212.
html?page=fullpage>.
North, Sam. “Haruki Murakami – Outside Looking In.”

Hackwriters.com. <http://hackwriters.com/murakami.
htm>.
Ragovin, Helene. “Found in Translation: Exploring the
Connection Between Japanese Literary Hipster Haruki
Murakami and writer Raymond Carver.” Tufts Journal
4 November 2008. <http://tuftsjournal.tufts.edu/2008/
11_1/features/04/>.
Rubin, Jay. Haruki Murakami and the Music of Words. London:
Vintage Books, 2005.
Sante, Luc. “Oddville: A Review of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle.”
New York Magazine 13 October 1997: 96-98.
Seats, Michael. Murakami Haruki: The Simulacrum in
Contemporary Japanese Culture. Latham, Md: Lexington
Books, 2006.
Strecher, Matthew Carl. Dances with Sheep: The Quest for
Identity in the Fiction of Haruki Murakami. Ann Arbor,
MI: Center for Japanese Studies, The University of
Michigan, 2002.
Strecher, Matthew Carl. Haruki Murakami’s The Wind-Up Bird
Chronicle, A Reader’s Guide. New York: Continuum
Contemporaries, 2006.
Suter, Rebecca. The Japanization of Modernity. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center, 2008.
Thompson, Matt. “The Elusive Murakami.” World Press Review

Vol.48, No.8. <http://www.worldpress.org/0801books1.
htm>.
Wikipedia. “Orpheus.” Wikipedia.com < http://en.wikipedia.org
/wiki/Orpheus>.
Wood, Michael. “The Roads Not Taken.” New Republic 11 May
1998, Vol.218 Issue 19, 49-52. <http://web.ebscohost.com
libproxy.newschool.edu/ehost/del…>.
Wray, John. “Haruki Murakami, The Art of Fiction No. 182.”
The Paris Review. http://www.theparisreview.org/
interviews/2/the-art-of-fiction -no-182-haruki-murakami>.

