Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

Signals From Babel: The Influence of Jorge Luis
Borges on Metafiction of the Late Twentieth
Century
Emma Stamm
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Stamm, Emma, "Signals From Babel: The Influence of Jorge Luis Borges on Metafiction of the Late Twentieth Century" (2011). Senior
Projects Spring 2011. Paper 253.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/253

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Signals from Babel:
The Influence of Jorge Luis Borges on Metafiction of the Late Twentieth Century

Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College

By
Emma Stamm

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
April 2011

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Sincerest thanks to Melanie Nicholson for her consistent support and assistance throughout the
research and writing of this project. Her commitment to and enthusiasm for Jorge Luis Borges
allowed me to explore his works in ways that proved to be indispensable to my understanding of
him.
I would also like to thank Cole Heinowitz and Paul LaFarge for the specific insight they bring to
the project as members of my review board.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents, whose love of reading literature sparked mine at an
early age, and close friends, whose conversations and personal advice served to remind me of the
power the written word has to compel and delight.

This project is dedicated to all readers who love the craft of writing, and all writers who
love the art of reading.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction: A Single Thread From a Writer of Infinities

1

Part One: Jorge Luis Borges and George Berkeley’s Treatise Concerning Principles of Human
Knowledge
7
Part Two: The Borgesian Use of Berkeleyan Immaterialism in Vladimir Nabokov’s Pale Fire
56
Part Three: Traces of Borges in Italo Calvino’s If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler and Kathy
Acker’s Don Quixote (Which Was A Dream)
104
Bibliography

152

Stamm 1
Introduction: A Single Thread from a Writer of Infinities
I began this project with an interest in exploring the fictional works of Jorge Luis Borges
as a means to reach a deeper understanding and awareness of the reasons for his continued
presence and influence over writers of the later twentieth century. At some point in my
engagement with Borges texts, it occurred to me that his works constituted a shift toward a
specific style of writing that at once lent greater creative agency to the reader and devalued the
concept of the author or single critical perspective as wielding authority over the meaning or
experience of reading a text. Throughout the course of the paper, I read a great deal of twentieth
century critical theory that sought to explain this phenomenon by revealing its structural
machinations: what, exactly, is happening inside of a story like “Pierre Menard, Author of the
Quixote” that makes it a perpetually compelling riddle – a virtual Gordian knot for which no
single stroke of genius might suffice to sever? One answer might reflect a general critical
consensus with regards to “Pierre Menard,” which is that the story is profoundly philosophical,
placing theoretical concerns with the meaning of writing and literary historicity at the forefront
of the narrative without ever answering them. In her review of the book Literary Philosophers:
Borges, Calvino, Eco, literary critic Heather Dubnik writes of the opinion of another critic with
regards to this situation:
Having concluded, not surprisingly, that Borges‟s ficciones are indeed literature
or literary, Irwin poses a more challenging problem: are Borges‟s stories
philosophy? Focusing primarily on “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote” Irwin
decides that the story is indeed philosophical “in that it raises issues and asks
questions that are of concerns to philosophers.” He then asks whether “Menard” is
“an instance of philosophy” and concludes that although “Menard” “raises

Stamm 2
interesting and important philosophical issues, but it neither argues for, nor
provides answers” the story is philosophical, though not philosophy per se.
(Dubnik 1144)
The story ends, but the issues it raises remains; unlike a philosophical argument that would seek
to resolve or, at the very least, constitute progress in relation to a specific concern or problem,
the story merely plays with philosophical excursions, taking them as narrative fodder without
“working” on them. By its conclusion, the reader is left on unstable theoretical grounds, and it is
left to him or her to decide whether to contend with “Menard” further – and, if so, how they
might go about building on the philosophy of reading proposed, but barely elucidated, by the
titular character. It seems that the story is doing something different from more traditional
narratives – it is asking more attention and creativity from the reader. Herein lies what
distinguishes Borges from other writers who contend with philosophical problems: his particular
concerns are germane to the practice of reading itself. He places his readers in a position where
they are compelled to reflect on situations that exactly mirror their own; in engaging with his
texts, they are forced to question the nature of their reading, which catalyzes a self-reflectiveness
that is, arguably, central to the Borgesian project. Because the philosophical background of
“Menard” calls for a radical re-conception of reading, it is up to the actual reader to decide
whether Pierre Menard is simply a character in a short story or if he is a voice for some truth that
applies beyond the world circumscribed by its pages. Like the reality of the world of Tlön, which
might indeed be disturbing the reality of Earth, the issues of Borges‟s fictions seem capable of
consequences that overturn the very nature of literature and reading, effects that extend well
beyond the stories which explore them.

Stamm 3
The power of Borges‟s stories to extend beyond themselves in this way is compounded
by the fact that so many of Borges‟s characters are defined by their reading: they are, above and
beyond all other definitive qualities, readers. This is where I began the genealogy that is the basis
for this project. Like the garden of forking paths which confounds the main character of one his
most famous stories, the number of ways in which a genealogy of Borgesian influence could be
traced seems infinite. What I have sought is a lineage that connects Borges‟s engagement with
philosophy to one of the technical ways in which he manifested his philosophical excursions,
which is through the use of the figures of a reader and a read text. The reader figure becomes the
seeker of a certain knowledge or reality that compels them on an epistemological quest; he or she
reflects the situation of the actual reader of the text, and together they are pulled forward in the
hopes of resolving complex mysteries with roots in the mysterious and metaphysical, mysteries
which, throughout the course of their seeking, become pertinent to their own lives.
A great deal of work on this project went into discerning what texts, specifically, to use
as demonstrations of this highly specific literary trope. Not all of Borges‟s stories are as
profoundly philosophical as “Pierre Menard” or the other works included in this paper; certainly
not all of them include the figures of a reader and a text. The stories and novels examined here
represent a scenario that is instrumental towards some basic aims of metafiction, which include
self-reflexivity and the signification of self-artifice as a means to ask greater questions about
literature and reality, but which is not widely common in its application. I ultimately came to
examine three novels commonly understood to be exemplary of metafiction: Vladimir
Nabokov‟s Pale Fire (1962), Italo Calvino‟s If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler (1979), and
Kathy Acker‟s Don Quixote (Which Was A Dream) (1976). The first two are considered to be
highly important within the metafictional canon; the structural experimentations of Pale Fire, in

Stamm 4
particular, were remarkably innovative at the time of its publication in 1962, and it is
consistently cited as being seminal in the development of twentieth century metafiction. What
connects each of these works to the short stories of Borges is the shared ground on which they
explore complex issues around reading and writing: each novel tells the story of a reader and a
textual world which possesses them. The protagonists in each work are truth-seekers; it is
revealed, ultimately, that they must create the meaning or truth they seek on their own terms, or
perhaps to abandon the notion of truth and meaning entirely. This is reflected in the fact that
questions of interpretation and meaning surrounding the novels seem to self-deconstruct upon
analysis: what “actually” happens in Pale Fire, for example, is resigned to the realm of either
mystery or mental phenomena that is not entirely accessible to any reader. It is in this
mystification, however, that the philosophical background of Borges appears, and that – as I
argue – the true significance of each of these works is evident.
My investigations into “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius”, “The Library of Babel”, “The
Aleph”, and “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote” led me to read the writings of eighteenthcentury Scottish philosopher George Berkeley, whose epistemological position immediately
struck me as having relevance to the subjectivity and personal relativism of meaning associated
with postmodern philosophy and critical theory. Berkeley‟s argument, which calls for an
understanding of the workings of human knowledge that places the experience of reality entirely
within the individual mind, serves as the background for the exploration of unreal worlds and the
descriptions of impossible situations that comprise the stories listed above. Borges applies this
philosophy to reading, establishing a metaphoric situation in which the mind of a reader and the
world of a text reflects the relationship Berkeley‟s human mind has to the universe seemingly
outside of it, but which is, according to his position, individually and internally synthesized.

Stamm 5
Borges‟s adoption of Berkeley‟s philosophy as a framework for some of his most widely
anthologized and significant short stories is evident in each of the novels included in this paper.
Through an examination of the various ways in which Acker, Calvino, and Nabokov utilize
Borges‟s literary reworking of the theories first expounded in A Treatise Concerning Principles
Of Human Knowledge, I believe I offer an important perspective on the influence Borges had
over the development of metafiction in the later twentieth century. The edition of Labyrinths
from which I read three of the four short stories of Borges considered in this work includes on its
back cover a quotation from author David Foster Wallace that strikes me as relevant in
explaining the magnitude of Borges‟s impact on later literature: “The truth, briefly stated, is that
Borges is arguably the great bridge between modernism and postmodernism in world literature.”
Borges‟s connection to Berkeley, and the visibility of this connection in later novels, is an
indispensable element of this bridge.
A word on the title of this project: the phrase “signals from Babel” is both an allusion to
the story The Library of Babel and to the biblical narrative from which the story takes its name.
The library contains every imaginable book; every grouping of the twenty-six letters of the
alphabet, in infinite iterations, is stored there. In the biblical tale, Babel is the name of a tower
representative of a unified people and language. This tower comes to be struck down by God;
subsequently, its language and people were also scattered. I imagine the signals that issue from
Babel to be individual strains of a language, personhood, or reality that – far from the
circumstance of unification symbolized by the standing tower – have meaning solely on the level
of the individual. The remnants of Babel are an infinity of languages, of minds, and of meanings;
an infinity of texts and readers. I use the word “signals” because I envision each of the texts
considered in this project as extending from a post-destruction Babel, writing towards an

Stamm 6
individual subjectivity and lack of unified meaning. The implications of this are manifold and
continue to be visible in literature today; were this a longer project, I could trace the genealogy
forward in time, including writers presently working. As it is, I believe I provide a wealth of
evidence for a Borgesian phenomenon deserving of critical attention. The very nature of
Borges‟s writings are such that I have no doubt that traces of his signature styles, motifs, and
techniques will be observable in literature for generations to come, enriching texts in new ways
with each passing era of authors and literatures. I hope to have provided one window onto the
way his influence is apparent over one stretch of time; of course, by my own assessment of the
limits of analyses of Borges, I understand that my reading of his works can be in no way
complete, nor can it deal in absolutes or irrefutable statements. It merely illuminates a thread that
I believe to be important in revealing the depth of a writer whose elusiveness and profundity will
undoubtedly confound and dazzle for years to come. The mysteries of Borges seem to
categorically resist a single or stable answer or explanation: I do not believe that I have provided
one, but that I have honored the fundamental complexity that has placed Borges among the
greatest figures of twentieth century world literature and which renews each individual story
with each new reading. Borges continues to compel and delight me, as a reader; it is my hope
that this paper duly recognizes him as both a major exponent of twentieth literary innovation and
a writer of timeless genius.

Stamm 7
Part One: Jorge Luis Borges and George Berkeley’s Treatise Concerning Principles of
Human Knowledge
The short stories of Argentinian author Jorge Luis Borges had an undeniable influence on
works by many famous writers from the 1950s onward. His brand of lyrical, tightly written
prose, engagement with expansive philosophical themes, and invention of fantastical settings and
landscapes are evident in novels and short stories across many genres in the second half of the
twentieth century. His contributions to the type of literature known as metafiction are
incontestable. True to the metafictional tradition, many of his most significant short stories (or
ficciones, as he referred to them) self-consciously address the devices of fiction, and in doing so,
call attention to their status as artifice.
The connections that can be drawn between Borges and later writers seem almost infinite.
My specific interest is in tracing specific elements of his style of metafiction from his influences
to his legacies. These are techniques he established in works such as “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis
Tertius,” “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote [Pierre menard, autor del quixote],” “The
Library Of Babel” [La biblioteca de babel], and “The Aleph” [ El aleph]. In examining these
elements of his writing, I hope to establish a lineage between Borges and one of his primary
influences, seventeenth-century Scottish philosopher George Berkeley. The particular genealogy
I wish to trace extends to Italo Calvino, Vladimir Nabokov, and Kathy Acker, three writers
working in the second half of the twentieth century. Taken at face value, the texts of Calvino,
Nabokov, and Acker might not seem to have much in common. Their work comprises content
that seems to have few obvious crossover points. It is my belief, however, that they share
significant thematic, technical, and stylistic threads that can be traced back to Borges.

Stamm 8
I would argue that the influence Borges had on Nabokov, Calvino, and Acker is, in
essence, the same: his use of Berkeley‟s philosophy of idealism, as a point of literary reference
and an overarching framework for his short stories, is manifested in specific works by all of
these writers. In this paper, I will refer to Berkeley‟s specific brand of idealism as
“immaterialism”: this is because idealism is a school of epistemological thought ascribed to by
many philosophers, and what is key about Berkeley‟s specific take on idealism with regards to
this literature is that it locates human knowledge of reality as being based not in the external,
material world, but within the mind. Hence, it stands against the idea that the knowable reality of
the world exists within its material features – what humans understand as reality is entirely a
construction of their mind, and that there exists no extant universe without a mind to perceive it.
In his seminal work A Treatise Concerning Principles of Human Knowledge, published 1710,
Berkeley writes: “For as to what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without
any relation to their being perceived, that is to me perfectly unintelligible. Their esse is percipi
[being is perception], nor is it possible they should have any existence out of the minds or
thinking things which perceive them” (2). This is the crux of the argument he makes throughout
the course of the book, using various example of the way sense perception works to support the
basic thesis that nothing exists without the mind. Throughout this chapter, I will refer back to
Berkeley as his theory relates to specific instances in the short stories of Borges founded around
his philosophy.
It is my goal to demonstrate and elucidate Borges‟s engagement with Berkeleyan
immaterialism, and to show, through examples, why I believe there is an important connection
between Berkeley, Borges, Acker, Nabokov, and Calvino. Furthermore, I would argue that the
way in which Berkeleyan immaterialism is manifested in the writings of these four authors

Stamm 9
implies that the true meaning and reality of a text is located inside the mind of the reader, instead
of something inherent to the text itself or to speculation about its writer or origin. I believe all of
these works contain figures that act as a metaphor for foundational principles of Berkeley‟s
philosophy; I hope to show why it is that I believe this implies that the meaning of a work is
constructed by and exists within the reader‟s mind as opposed to something outside of him or
her.
I have decided to use Borges‟s short stories “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius,” “Pierre
Menard, Author Of The Quixote,” “The Library Of Babel,” and “The Aleph” because I believe
they contain the most apparent connections to the writings of Nabokov, Calvino, and Acker. This
connection is founded on the fact that each of the selected Borges stories confront Berkeley‟s
immaterialism in the same way: they each contain the figure of a reader, or group of readers,
who has a meaningful relationship to a text or body of texts. In this paper, I posit that the
reader‟s relationship to the text stands as a metaphor for Berkeley‟s explanation of the way in
which the human mind has a relationship to the universe: each work confronted contains an
analogy between the reader-text relationship and the mind-universe relationship of Berkeley‟s
immaterialism. This is essence of the genealogy that will be traced.
In my interpretation these stories, “the reader” corresponds in Berkeleyan terms to the
human whose reality exists entirely inside his mind, which is a reality based on sense
impressions of the world of “real” objects that is created by the act of God‟s mind perceiving
them. This world of real objects corresponds to the text: the reader‟s act of textual interpretation
stands as metaphor for the human‟s act of reality-interpretation. The realities of both exist
entirely inside the reader, or the human: they are subjective realities. In fact, the relationship
between the reader and the text is the theme of all of these stories. Each story contains the figure

Stamm 10
of a reader, usually the main character or a protagonist, who is on a quest to understand the text;
this quest comprises the plot. This allows for each story to offer commentary on the situation of
an actual reader and a text. In none of these short stories or novels is a stable truth about a text
ever reached; and for the reader of these works, I believe there is no stable truth or truths to be
garnered from them. For Calvino, Acker, and Nabokov, they are musings in the same vein as the
writings of Jorge Luis Borges, whose conception of what it meant to be a reader (as
demonstrated in his short stories) often reflected George Berkeley‟s theory of how humans
understand the universe.
The basic premise of Berkeley‟s immaterialism is that the universe is created by human
perception. Nothing exists outside the human mind, immaterialism posits; to be is to be
perceived by a mind. In A Treatise, Berkeley writes
That neither our thoughts, nor passions, nor ideas formed by imagination, exist
without the mind, is what everybody will allow. And to me it is no less evident
that the various sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however blended or
combined together (that is, whatever elements they compose), cannot exist
otherwise than in a mind perceiving them (2).
Here Berkeley is arguing for the idea that what is commonly understood as reality – the real
world of objects and materials into which man is born and out of which he exits upon death – is
actually a product of the mind. His declaration that “everybody will allow” for his explanation of
the origin of thoughts, passions, and ideas is preceded by a brief description of the workings of
perception. He outlines, at the beginning of the Treatise, the channels through which various
sensory perceptions are received: “Smelling furnishes me with odours, the palate with tastes, and
hearing conveys sounds to the mind in all their variety of tone and composition” (1). The fact

Stamm 11
that sense perceptions are the product of the individual body is the framework for his entire
philosophy. A Treatise Concerning Principles Of Human Knowledge consists of examples that
demonstrate the ways in which the human mind gives rise to sense perceptions, which in turn
constitute reality.
It is my belief that the literary use of immaterialism that begins with Borges and extends to
Nabokov, Calvino and Acker has come to a sort of terminal point. That is, because they place the
true meaning or reality of a literary work within the mind of the reader, they problematize the
possibility for future works to build on them. Because the relationship between the reader and the
text is completely contingent on the individual reader‟s mind, there are as many “texts” as there
are readers, and whatever a reader derives from his or her engagement with the work is the true
work. Theoretically, then, any response or continuation of this genealogy could arguably be
traced back to Borges, insofar as the link is the subjectivity of reality. Indeed, Borges was a
precursor to a contemporary philosophy of reading that I believe is exemplified well in Kathy
Acker‟s writings, but which could arguably be found in many later twentieth century novels. The
nature of this terminality is such that the meaning of the book “stops”, in a sense, with the
individual reader, because they are active in creating its meaning. With each new generation of
readers comes a new series of readings, each which has meaning only unto each individual mind.
A novel or short story that uses immaterialism as a framework contains no interpretive
possibilities beyond that which falls within the text (either directly or indirectly). By this I mean
that, because of the radical subjectivity of immaterialism, the meaning of literary works that
utilize the theory to frame their narratives evolve directly as a result of their being created by a
reader‟s mind – just as the world of material objects is secondary to the fact of their being
perceived. Kathy Acker‟s works, which I would argue as very strongly influenced by Borges,

Stamm 12
experiment radically with traditional notions of plot, character, narrative, and structure. They
describe scenarios in which the fundamental isolation of every human mind is foregrounded, and
the concept of objective reality is shown, ruthlessly, to be just a fantasy. Her main characters
comment frequently on the fact that they believe themselves to be insane; the character of their
assumed insanity is that they feel cut off from a human reality that extends beyond their minds.
Berkeleyan immaterialism is the root for these writings, and the way in which it is treated
in the short stories of Borges served as a model for Nabokov, Calvino, and Acker. In each of
these works, the use of immaterialism as a literary framework places the “reality” of the story
inside the mind of the reader; whatever the reader derives from it is the correct understanding of
the story. There are no normative features within the works that seem to signal one way in which
to begin to understand them; no clues given as to what “should” be taken from it. What is
significant for the works selected for this project is that this phenomenon has a direct basis in
Borges‟s engagement with Berkeley‟s philosophies.
I have indicated that any understanding of the universe is “correct,” according to the
basic tenets of immaterialism – that the mind perceives and creates its own reality. I would claim
that, in these stories, the act of perceiving the world is the same as the act of interpreting a text.
“The reader” figure in these works has the same function as the immaterialist human, who
synthesizes his reality based on his sense perceptions. Both human and reader serve to create a
universe that has meaning relative to the mind of the universe-perceiver/text-interpreter. Because
a novel or short story presents the reader with an already-created universe, the author of the
novel or short story assumes the role of “the creator,” or the perceiving/interpreting mind. “The
reader” must submit themselves to the work as it is, with the understanding that because of its

Stamm 13
subjectivity, there is no “right” or “wrong” way to understand it – to begin to talk about it, think
about it, or write about it.
I would furthermore argue that the readers or critics who are looking to promulgate a
theory or explain a personal message that they have derived from one of these texts faces an
extreme challenge. This is due to the fact that the question of “deeper meaning” is, as noted
before, rendered essentially pointless in these works – “deep meaning” in works like these is
whatever any reader takes away from them. The use of immaterialism in these works makes it
such that to offer any one take on it as the “correct” take would be to assume a position that is,
fundamentally, against what the text is “about”, in a sense – which, I think, is the creation of
reality and meaning on the level of the individual.
Immaterialism expressly holds that the only absolute authority over reality is God; all
other views of reality are small slices of the entirety of the universe, and no human can claim to
understand reality in a way that extends beyond what he perceives. Berkeley writes
The ideas imprinted on the Senses by the Author of nature [God] are called real
things: and those excited in the imagination being less regular, vivid, and
constant, are more properly termed ideas, or images of things. But then our
sensations, be they never so vivid and distinct, are nevertheless ideas, that is, they
exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as truly as the ideas of its own framing.
(15)
When Berkeley claims that “ideas imprinted on the Senses by the Author of nature” are “real
things,” he is saying that what is real in the world are sense impressions, and that these sense
impressions are the result of God impressing sensory information on the human body. His claim
that begins with“Those [ideas] excited in the imagination…” refers to the fact that ideas within

Stamm 14
the mind (referred to by him as “the imagination”) are not the same as “real things.” The next
claim – that “our sensations . . . exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as truly as the ideas of
its own framing” argues that God, as the one who creates all sense impressions, is the basis for
all reality. For Berkeley, sense impressions occur within an individual mind, and arise as a result
of God‟s existence, which has agency over the sense experience of every mind.
I am arguing that the selected works of Borges, Nabokov, Calvino, and Acker function as
analogs for the immaterialist world; because of this, I believe that that the only absolute authority
over these texts is their writers, and readers must understand that any interpretation of them only
has relevance relative to them and them alone. Following this analogy, the writer is a sort of
immaterialist God; his or her word is the final word on the text. What this means for readers is
that they must take the novel or short story at face value. Any special meaning or message they
derive from the text is not what is objectively “true” about it; it is only their take on it, just as
sense impressions are individual experiences placed in the human mind by an omniscient God.
The “author of nature” is Borges, Calvino, Acker, and Nabokov. This functions on a level inside
the works, too: “the reader” figure of the selected short stories and novels is on a quest to
understand the text. As fruitless as this quest inevitably turns out to be – for various reasons
which will be demonstrated – I believe the quest itself is the subject of the plot, in every case.
Because it bears the most explicit and pervasive influence of Berkeleyan immaterialism,
it is useful to begin with an analysis of Berkeley in conjunction with Borges‟s short story “Tlön,
Uqbar, Orbis Tertius.” “Tlön, Uqbar” posits a world in which the metaphysics of idealism are
made physical – concretized in an actual, physical planet. This is demonstrated in various
features of Tlön, the world that operates according to idealist precepts. The tale‟s protagonist is a
narrator who is intrigued by a series of encyclopedias he discovers. This discovery is precipitated

Stamm 15
by his inquiry into the origin of a quotation recounted to him during a conversation one night. He
is informed that the bon mot came from an article in “The Anglo-American Cyclopaedia” about a
territory named “Uqbar,” a country which, upon due research, the narrator discovers is not an
actual place (3).
As both reader and narrator find out, a “secret and benevolent society” of thinkers across
time (including George Berkeley) met to fabricate literature from this planet in the form of
encyclopedias (15). These texts were designed to be read as referring to a real place; in actuality,
they were playful elaborations on a philosophy that locates the production of reality inside the
human mind. This planet of this secret society‟s creation, Tlön, imagined Berkeleyan
immaterialism as a phenomenon of place. The narrator gives a lengthy account of the various
ways in which immaterialism manifests itself as the metaphysical backbone of Tlön before
alluding to the idea that the world of the Tlön encyclopedia is, in fact, leaking into the reality of
Earth.
The story begins with its narrator, a character named Jorge Luis Borges, recounting a
meal he shared with a friend named Adolfo Bioy Casares. Jorge Luis Borges was, of course, a
real person. Adolfo Bioy Casares was also a real person – an Argentinian writer whose
friendship and working relationship with Borges is well known. Both writers were known for
writing metafictional and experimental works; they wrote together under the pen name “H.
Bustos Domecq” and were associated with the same groups of writers and intellectuals in the
Argentinian literary scene. A dinner between Bioy Casares and Borges is a prime set-up for a
story which directly addresses the power of novels to transform the world of the reader. The
protagonist here is the reader” figure (Borges and Bioy Casares) who serves as a symbol for the

Stamm 16
role the human mind plays in immaterialism. In this case, he is a reader who is impelled toward a
line of research that serves as a statement about the ways that literature influences reality.
Many of Borges‟s non-fictional works confront what it means to engage in the practice of
consuming literature. The personal essays of Borges reflect a reverence for the arts of letters; his
image as a cultural figure is that of a man who not only voraciously wrote, but also consumed
texts and expounded on the virtues of reading for pleasure. The fictional Borges of “Tlön Uqbar”
reads like a reflection of Borges‟s image in popular culture. It seems almost as if Borges, as the
archetypal reader, named the protagonist of “Tlön Uqbar” after himself to symbolize the reader
whose reality is altered by a text. I would say that “Tlön Uqbar” makes the argument, grounded
in Berkeleyan immaterialism, that novels and short fictions are created in the action of reading
them. The act of reading is the act of text-creation.
What “Tlön Uqbar” specifically offers is a fleshed-out vision of a world in which
Berkeley‟s theories are empirically provable. It establishes an analogy between the act of reading
and the act of perception as creation. According to Berkeleyan idealism, to perceive is to create.
Berkeley writes:
Some truths there are so near and so obvious to the mind that a man need only
open his eyes to see them. Such I take this important one to be, viz. that all the
choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which
compose the mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a mind,
that their being is to be perceived or known. (A Treatise 3-4)
Here Berkeley is arguing for the philosophical concept of esse is percipi – being is perception; to
be is to be perceived. When he writes “Some truths there are so near and so obvious to the mind
that a man need only open his eyes to see them”, he is pointing out that perception is constitutive

Stamm 17
of truth. This is supported by the statement which begins “in a word all those bodies” – there,
Berkeley is saying that without a mind to perceive them, the “bodies which compose the mighty
frame of the world” would simply not exist. The relationship Berkeley establishes between the
human mind as perceiving, i.e., creating body to the perceived, i.e., created world is precisely the
same as the relationship between “the reader” figure and the bodies of writing they read. For
“Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius,” this is the fictionalized Borges and the fabricated encyclopedias
which compel him down the line of research, inquiry, and amazement that comprises the story‟s
plot.
“Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius” is perhaps Borges‟s most well-known and widely
referenced short story. First published in 1940, its narrative is echoed in various works from the
later twentieth century, most notably in Nabokov‟s Pale Fire. Released in 1962, Pale Fire takes
as a point of narrative departure the subject of the discussion between Borges and Casares that
opens “Tlon Uqbar” and foreshadows the surreal trajectory it follows. This discussion involves
the suggestion of a framework for a novel, which came to serve as the basis for Pale Fire. The
entirety of the short story, however, contends with immaterialism in a great number of ways. The
conversation between Casares and Borges unfolds as such: “Bioy Casares had dinner with me
that evening and we became lengthily engaged in a vast polemic concerning the composition of a
novel in the first person, whose narrator would omit or disfigure the facts and indulge in various
contradictions which would permit a few readers--very few readers--to perceive an atrocious or
banal reality” (3).
This passage is not only the guiding principle for what is recognized as one of Nabokov‟s
most well-renowned works and one of the twentieth century‟s most unique and formally
innovative novels, but also offers a good opening into the way in which “Tlön, Uqbar” contends

Stamm 18
with immaterialism. Here, Borges explains that “a few readers” would be permitted “to perceive
an atrocious or banal reality.” This is the first indication of Berkeley‟s philosophy. The reader is
notified that the main character is already familiar with the exact game of perception and
creation of reality into which, just a few pages later, the plot places him. The writers – Casares
and Borges – assume the role of the immaterialist God who “permit” the readers, or perceivers,
to come into an understanding of an “atrocious or banal reality.” As the assumed authors of the
text they imagine, they hold absolute authority over the existence of the textual “universe.” The
readers who “perceive an atrocious or banal reality” are metaphors for all human beings,
according to immaterialism, whose perception of the world is entirely relative to the impressions
contained within their mind.
I would argue that the proposed work discussed by the two writers is meant to be read as
a reflection of the way in which “Tlön Uqbar” functions for areader. The structure of the story
mirrors the novel of which the fictional Borges and Bioy Casares talk: it is written in the first
person, and its complexity seems to indicate that there are profound depths to the story, angles
only hinted at by its surface content. However, I would argue that “Tlön Uqbar” is simply an
account of the ways in which literature affects the world of the reader, demonstrated through the
outlining of an unreal and fantastical universe. This universe is posited as an analog to
immaterialism. The narrator imagined by Bioy and Borges “disfigures the facts and indulges in
various contradictions” but ultimately rewards the careful “few readers” with the perception of
“an atrocious or banal reality.”
Casares and Borges here establish a novel for which careful and close reading pays off. I
would argue, however, that this statement operates as a red herring for readers of“Tlön, Uqbar”.
It indicates, for the novel proposed by the two writers, that there is something special to be found

Stamm 19
beneath the surface of the text: Borges appear to be suggesting that a close reading of “Tlön,
Uqbar” will reveal some sort of grand mystery within it. Although, obviously “Tlön, Uqbar” is
not the same as the proposed novel, the story is structured in such a way that it seems like a
mystery which rewards a close reading with the discovery of a deep truth. However, it ultimately
seems that there is no such grand truth, no ultimate payoff for a close reading of it. Because of
this, I would make the case that the story can be viewed as an extended musing on the search for
meaning within narrative. Whatever the reader takes away from “Tlön, Uqbar” is the “atrocious
or banal reality” of the work imagined in the first paragraph; the truth that is perceived by a
reader is the correct truth (be it atrocious, banal, both, or neither!).
To begin to understand how this contention relates to Berkeleyan immaterialism, I will
indicate a few places in which immaterialism is seen within the text. For the most part, it is in
features of Tlön. The planet features specific quirks that are, in essence, manifestations of
immaterialist principles. For example, the planet features objects called Hronir. Hronir are the
double of objects that have been misplaced. The narrator states that “centuries and centuries of
idealism have not failed to influence reality. In the most ancient regions of Tlon, the duplication
of lost objects is not infrequent. Two persons look for a pencil; the first finds it and says nothing;
the second finds a second pencil, no less real, but closer to his expectations” (13). This is a
demonstration of immaterialism on the basis of the fact that the existence of the found pencils is
contingent upon the expectations of the pencil-seekers. The object that is lost is duplicated
because of what happens inside the mind of the object-loser: after the object has initially been
misplaced, a new one is forged, since the object-loser must now confront the reality of a missing
pencil. The internal confrontation with the reality of a lost pencil is what creates the second one.

Stamm 20
The person who finds the second pencil is the person who initially lost it, because it is
“closer to his expectations” – implying that he or she had expectations regarding the pencil to
begin with. The first person, who “finds it and says nothing”, has not actually lost a pencil. He or
she never had expectations to which the pencil they found could or could not conform. The
passage continues: “These secondary objects are called hronir and are, though awkward in form,
somewhat longer. Until recently, the hronir were the accidental products of distraction and
forgetfulness.” (13). The awkward forms of the hronir are concretized symbols of the awkward
mental states of distraction and forgetfulness.
Another specific element of Tlön that refers to immaterialism is its physical structure. Of
the technical layout of Tlön, Borges writes: “The geometry of Tlön comprises two somewhat
different disciplines: the visual and the tactile. The latter corresponds to our own geometry and is
subordinated to the first. The basis of visual geometry is the surface, not the point” (12). This
description functions as an excellent demonstration of a way in which immaterialism might be
made real. The fact that the tactile discipline of Tlön‟s geometry is subordinated to the visual,
which correspons to human geometry, is perfectly in line with the concept that the world‟s
existence is a phenomenon of the mind. It makes sense, also, that the visual “discipline” is of
primary importance here. Sight is the sense receptor most commonly associated with perception;
Berkeley uses it frequently in his work to elucidate his epistemological argument:
Now, why may we not as well argue that figure and extension are not patterns or
resemblances of qualities existing in matter, because to the same eye at different stations,
or eyes of a different texture at the same station, they appear various, and cannot
therefore be the images of anything settled and determinate throughout the mind? (A
Treatise 7)

Stamm 21
The world of images, figures, and colors seems to be more active in creating human reality than,
for example, the world of scents.
The narrator continues on the geometry of Tlön: “This geometry disregards parallel lines
and declares that man in his movement modifies the forms which surround him. The basis of its
arithmetic is the notion of indefinite numbers. They emphasize the importance of concepts of
greater and lesser, which our mathematicians symbolize as > and <” (12). The fact that “man in
his movement modifies the forms which surround him” corresponds perfectly to what
immaterialism argues. According to its most elemental principles, my reading of Borges actually
“creates” the text, or my sitting in a chair is what makes the chair real - because what is real to
me is only real for me. This is the basis for the old philosophical question about a tree falling in
the woods: Berkeley‟s argument is that because man has no way of knowing reality beyond what
he might gather through his senses and then put together in a logical pattern within his mind, we
have no choice but to believe we create the reality with which we engage.
The emphasis on “the importance of the concepts of greater or lesser” makes sense in this
light because “greater” and “lesser” refer to relative ideas. Ultimately, immaterialism makes the
case for relativity, reality grounded in the perceiver: all he or she understands as “real” is relative
to him or her. I would argue that the importance of greater or lesser stands in contradiction to the
concepts of “great” or “not-great,” which are absolutes. Because immaterialism is fundamentally
opposed to an absolute reality that is untouchable by human perception - a standard universe that
operates outside of the mind – the only concepts that would logically fit in Tlön would be
relative concepts. Because indefinite numbers have no end point, each number cannot be thought
of as being an absolute representation of value. The number only symbolizes a value with regard
to the numbers that come before and after it. Were Tlön‟s arithmetic based on definite numbers,

Stamm 22
each numerical value could stand alone. However, the overall scope of math in Tlön is
constituted by each individual number which operates outside of a system of absolutes.
The story continues with the outline of the geometry of Tlön: “They maintain that the
operation of counting quantifies and converts them from indefinite into definite sums” (12). The
fact that indefinite sums are transformed into definite sums via a mental operation is perfectly in
line with immaterialism. What I believe is implied here is that the definites are only definite for
the person counting. The next line remarks that “The fact that several individuals who count the
same quantity should obtain the same result is, for the psychologists, an example of association
of ideas or of a good exercise of memory” (13). In Tlön, there is no logical or provable reason
that the same quantity counted should produce the same numerical result; the only explanation
for this occurrence comes in the form of speculation and common convention.
One of the more distinctive features of many of Borges‟s most famous short stories is the
lack of character development. Contrary to the way in which traditional fiction functions, most of
these stories seem wholly unconcerned with the unfolding of a personality throughout the course
of their text. For example, the protagonist of “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius” does not seem to have
any real personality traits. The reader does not see his likes or dislikes, his flaws, misgivings,
loves or internal conflicts. He only serves as an actor in the text; his role is not that of one who
represents a real person. He is a character defined not by who he is, but what he does and what
he says in relation to other characters. I would argue that this is an immaterialist feature of “Tlön,
Uqbar, Orbis Tertius” as well as several other works of Borges. The protagonist is enfolded fully
within the world in which he finds himself, and is lost within this world. This world, and the
worlds of the other stories to which I refer, are the product of their character‟s imagining; the
distinction between the character and the world in which the characters act is only an illusion. I

Stamm 23
would argue that, essentially, Tlön is the fictionalized Borges of “Tlön, Uqbar”, just as the world
in which we live is only an extension of our minds, according to immaterialism.
The existence of a world that exists entirely within the mind of its main character is a
feature of the short story the “Library of Babel,” as well. This story contends with immaterialism
in ways that are both similar to and very different from those seen in “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis
Tertius.” The lack of character development is one example of these similarities. The first-person
narrator of “The Library of Babel” does not have any real qualities. Personal relationships, clues
as to the nature of his spirit or his emotions, all features that might identify him as an individual
– these are left out of the text. His entire identity is that of one who tells the story of the library,
as if he were the library. The critical similarity between “Library Of Babel” and ““Tlön, Uqbar”
is that they both explore the relationship between a reader and a text. In the case of the
former“the reader” is the narrator.The “text” that is read is not a fabricated or found text, but the
library, which serves as a metaphor for the universe.
“The Library Of Babel” tells the story of a library that contains all possible books – every
conceivable grouping of the letters in the alphabet is found in this library. The narrator of the
story describes the physical structure of the library and tells of the lives of its librarians, who live
inside of it. It is suggested throughout the story that the library is infinite, although it is also
mentioned that many men doubt this fact. He expresses concern with this, and the story‟s end is a
sort of call for the vindication of the notion that the library is infinite.
It is made clear from the first sentence of the story that the library is a metaphor for the
universe: “The universe (which others call the library) is composed of an indefinite and perhaps
infinite number of hexagonal galleries, with vast air shafts between, surrounded by very low
railings.” (51) I believe that the librarians act as a symbol for all humans and the narrator‟s

Stamm 24
assertion that the library contains an infinite number of books reflects a belief that the universe is
infinite. I would furthermore argue that this story is founded on basic points of immaterialism.
The relationship between the narrator and the library is analogous to the relationship
between the human mind and the universe as posited in A Treatise Concerning Principles Of
Human Knowledge. The narrator interprets the universe as a library – a place filled with
knowledge that extends far beyond what one man can learn in a lifetime. And as the library of
this story is actually an overt symbol for the universe, the narrator functions as “the reader”
figure: the one who is the universe-interpreting (and, therefore, universe-creating) human. The
narrator‟s understanding of the universe as a library is relative to his way of seeing it. It follows
that the universe created by “the reader” figure is a library. As a reader, the narrator sees the
universe as a library for the senses. He also mentions that the library “can only be the work of a
god” (54), and that after mankind becomes extinct, it will continue (58). I believe that this
reflects the narrator‟s spiritual belief in a higher power behind his universe.
As noted, the beginning of the story names the library as the universe. Although it is not
given much attention within the text, the fact that right at the outset, the titular figure is
established as “the universe”, is significant. Borges writes: “The universe (which others call the
Library) is composed of an indefinite and perhaps infinite number of hexagonal galleries, with
vast air shafts between, surrounded by very low railings. From any of these hexagons one can
see, interminably, the upper and lower floors.” (51)What I find particularly interesting here is the
narrator‟s mention that others refer to the universe as the library. This begs the question: does the
narrator, too, refer to the universe as the library? If so, why does he does he not identify with the
“others” who call it that? He identifies himself, on the very next page, as “a man of the Library”
(52). It seems that he is stating that he is a man of the universe; implicit here is the idea that the

Stamm 25
story is meant to be read as a description of the way the narrator believes the universe functions.
“The others” of this library are simply figures within the narrator‟s mind. The truth, I believe, is
that he understands that his belief that the universe is a library is merely his understanding of it.
This is why he begins the story by referring to the library first as the universe, and relegating its
understanding as a “library” to the mysterious “others.” Very quickly, he begins referring to the
universe as the Library, too – he identifies himself as one among them.
Both “Tlön, Uqbar” and “The Library Of Babel” outline their narrator‟s journey to
understand a body of texts (in the case of “Tlön, Uqbar”, the “Anglo-American Cyclopaedias”;
in “Library of Babel”, the texts of the library). Whereas the narrator of “Tlön, Uqbar” is
compelled by texts he discovers, the entire life of the narrator of “Library of Babel” consists of
texts. Both stories are about the ways in which their lives are entirely dependent on their status as
readers of texts. The reality of both characters is completely dependent upon books. From this,
we could surmise that the underlying theme is that both characters are archetypal readers. Their
lives are created within their minds, and consist of textual worlds – the worlds outlined in these
stories.
One of the most important aspects of “Library of Babel” is its narrator‟s insistence on the
fact that the library is infinite. In immaterialism, infinity is a deeply important concept, given that
Berkeley believes that the human mind represents a slice of the infinite reality created by God.
He writes: “hence, it follows there is an infinite number of parts in each particle of Matter which
are not perceived by sense” (A Treatise 22). This relates directly to the following excerpt from
“Library of Babel”:
The Library exists ab aeterno. This truth, whose immediate corollary is the future
eternity of the world, cannot be placed in doubt by any reasonable mind. Man, the

Stamm 26
imperfect librarian, may be the product of chance or of malevolent demiurgi; the
universe, with its elegant endowment of shelves, of enigmatical volumes, of
inexhaustible stairways for the traveler and latrines for the seated librarian, can
only be the work of a god (52).
Here, the narrator makes his first claim that the Library is eternal. By logical extension, the
statement “this truth, whose immediate corollary is the future eternity of the world” is a
declaration that the future of the universe is eternal. The narrator is deeply impressed by the
universe‟s formality and elegance; his allegiances are not to his fellow librarians, but to the place
– universe and library – that they call home. He is also arguing for the ultimate mystery of the
universe, which I believe is what Berkeley was suggesting in his observance of “an infinite
number of parts in each particle of Matter which are unperceived by sense.” What is implied
there is that man is able to sense only a small fraction of the “parts in each particle‟; the majority
of each particle, and (by extension) the universe remains unknown to him. Thus, the narrator of
“Library of Babel” and George Berkeley both seem to be arguing against the idea that man can
understand all of reality.
Both Berkeley and the narrator of “Library of Babel” make a serious case for the
existence of God in their respective universes. In “Library of Babel” God makes an appearance
as a sort of uber-man of the Library: “We also know of another superstition of that time: that of
the Man of the book. On some shelf in some hexagon (men reasoned) there must exist a book
which is the formula and perfect compendium of all the rest: some librarian has gone through it
and he is analogous to a God” (56). According to the description of the Library as a place
containing an infinite number of books, this “formula and perfect compendium of all the rest”
would be a formula for infinity. The librarian who understands this formula would be the closest

Stamm 27
figure to a God the Library could ever know. The narrator, apparently, believes in this God.
Toward the story‟s end, the narrator emotionally claims, “The impious maintain that nonsense is
normal in the Library and that the reasonable (and even humble and pure coherence) is an almost
miraculous exception” (57). He has already described God as one who would have read the
“formula” for the Library, implying that the library has a form. Indeed, much of the story
consists of descriptions of the library‟s neat, geometric layout. The narrator clearly believes in an
order to the universe; much of the story is devoted to rich explanations of this geometry. The
penultimate sentence confirms this: “If an eternal traveler were to cross it in any direction, he
would see that the same volumes were repeated in the same disorder (which, thus repeated,
would be an order: the Order)(58). This claims that the library has an infinite structure.
This “order,” I would argue, has the same function as Berkeley‟s God: It creates the
conditions for all knowable things to exist. Just as one librarian cannot read all of the books, one
mind cannot comprehend the entire universe; but there is an order to the library that is the
foundation for its existence, and there is the mind of God which, in immaterialism, creates the
universe. Berkeley takes care to note that the reality of the universe is not that which is perceived
by one mind, but that which is perceived by any mind. Because God‟s mind perceives
everything, everything that is real, i.e., perceived, exists as a result of him. He writes:
Wherever bodies are said to have no existence without the mind, I would not be
understood to mean this or that particular mind, but all minds whatsoever. It does
not therefore follow from the foregoing principle that bodies are annihilated and
created every moment, or exist not at all during the intervals between our
perception of them. (A Treatise 23)

Stamm 28
This passage suggests that he is saying that because God‟s mind is always present, the absence of
a human mind does not mean that the objects (or “bodies,” as he calls them) of the universe
disappear in the moment they are no longer observed by a human being. The moment a librarian
returns a book to a shelf, the book does not stop existing; the moment one of the Library‟s
hexagonal rooms is vacated, it does not disappear.
It appears that the narrator of “The Library of Babel” needs the library to have a God,
because he needs to believe in an order to the universe. This is because this “library” is actually
his version of the universe; it is what is real for him, and I would make the claim that he seeks an
order to the reality of his own crafting. The way in which he outlines the physical structure of the
Library, recounts Library lore, and declares facts from the Library‟s history and about its current
state seem to come not from any objective truth, but from a sort of tale he makes up. It is as if
they are just figures in his mind. The only time he refers to another person by a title other than
“explorer” (of the Library) or “librarian” is when he mentions a discovery made by his father.
The overarching impression is that of someone weaving a tale.
The narrator begins the story by indicating that others refer to the universe as the Library
– and then launches into stories from his past that are, by all accounts, plucked from firsthand
experience with the Library. The stories absolutely indicate that he agrees with the “others”; it
was noted before that he identifies with the “others”; I would say that the various sketches of and
anecdotes about the library prove he agrees that, indeed, the universe is a library. This includes
an encounter had by his father within it (53) and descriptions of the opinions of various people
on various aspects of the library. It is implied that these “others” are other librarians; I believe, in
actuality, that they are parts of the narrator‟s imagination.

Stamm 29
The most telling evidence for the supposition that the narrator is only giving out his
version of a personal reality – not one shared by anybody other than him – comes at the end of
the story:
The methodical task of writing distracts me from the present state of men. The
certitude that everything has been written negates us or turns us into phantoms . . .
Perhaps my old age and fearfulness deceive me, but I suspect that the human
species – the unique species – is about to be extinguished, but the Library will
endure: illuminated, solitary, infinite, perfectly motionless, equipped with
precious volumes, useless, incorruptible, secret. (58).
The narrator‟s suspicion that “the human species . . . is about to be extinguished” may actually be
read as a fear of his own death. This is supported by other evidence within the story: at the
beginning, he describes, in close details, what the conditions of his death will be like: “Once I am
dead, there will be no lack of pious hands to throw me over the railing; my grave will be the
fathomless air; my body will sink endlessly and decay and dissolve in the wind generated by the
fall, which is infinite” (52). This description of death rites comes out of nowhere; I believe it
hints at the fact that the narrator‟s life is almost up.
The story continues to the impassioned cry against those who hold a “certitude that
everything has been written” (58). The rhetoric he uses to describe the library is that of
reverence: it is referred to as “divine” (57). The descriptions of the library also issue from a place
of deep respect for it; clearly the narrator has spent a great deal of time noting the particulars of
the space so that he might write them down: “the methodical task of writing distracts me from
the present state of men”, he notes (58). This calls attention (in a metafictional twist) to the fact

Stamm 30
that he is aware of his status of narrator of the story. It is almost as if he is trying to assume the
role of the Library‟s creator, or author.
My argument, of course, is that he is the author – and his great fear is that with his death
will come the end of his Library, or his universe. This is precisely why he needs the Library to
have a God: the God will make it endure, just as the God of Berkeley‟s immaterialism makes all
things endure. We might note here that, as a Christian philosopher, Berkeley believed in an
afterlife; a literary working of immaterialism that contends with the possibility of life after death
is perfectly fitting. The narrator of “Library of Babel” wants his universe to endure; he wants it
to have an order and a God, but beyond those two things, he wants it to be infinite. The story
ends with the narrator‟s final word on what he believes to be true of his Library:
Those who imagine it to be without limit forget that the possible number of
ancient books does have such a limit. I venture to suggest this solution to the
ancient problem: The Library is unlimited and cyclical. If an eternal traveler were
to cross it in any direction, he would see that the same volumes were repeated in
the same disorder (which, thus repeated, would be an order: the Order). My
solitude is gladdened by this elegant hope. (58)
This final sentence is a declaration of the narrator‟s conviction about the metaphysical aspects of
his universe. The sentence which begins “If an eternal traveler were to cross it in any direction”
reveals that what makes the Library infinite is what makes it ordered: the repetition of its
disorder.
What seems to be really going on here, however, is actually not a case for why the
universe/Library is infinite: these are the words of a dying man who is contemplating his entire
world slipping away from him. The final sentence mentions his solitude. This is possibly his

Stamm 31
state before dying. What is truly telling, though, is his hope that the Library is not only
unlimited, but cyclical. As a part of the Library, if it were cyclical, this would indicate a life after
death for the narrator. If the Library contains all possible books, a book that details his life is in
there, too – just as the story of his life is part of the story of the universe. If the Library/universe
is cyclical, it means his story will be repeated infinitely. This is the hope to which the narrator
clings.
Whether this turns out to be the case is never offered; the story ends there. What is of
greatest importance for the purposes of the present argument in “Library of Babel” is that its
protagonist shapes his own reality with his mind. He happens to shape it into a library. Before his
death, he writes the story of the library, which comprises the text of “Library of Babel” (it is,
after all, a work of metafiction, calling attention to its status as text). His reality is the Library,
and it is the only version of the universe offered within the text – there is never a point at which
he mentions a universe beyond the library. Because this is of his creation, the story is essentially
about him, or at least his perception; this is the essence of this story‟s connection to Berkeleyan
immaterialism.
Borges contended with the concept of infinity in another one of his most well-know
stories: “The Aleph”. Both stories contain a figure which represents the entirety of the universe.
In the case of “Library of Babel”, it is the titular library; in “The Aleph”, it is an Aleph, a
Borgesian invention. An Aleph is a point in space which contains all other points. There is only
one of it in the entire universe. To look into the Aleph is to see everything in existence all at
once, quite literally. The use of an object or place to represent infinity is a similarity between the
two stories that pertains to my argument.

Stamm 32
There are notable differences among “The Library of Babel,” “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis
Tertius” and “The Aleph”. For instance, the narrator of “The Aleph” is a fairly well-developed
character, by Borgesian standards (in fact, his account of his emotions and memories comprise a
great deal of the narrative). Unlike “Library of Babel” and “Tlön, Uqbar,” “The Aleph” does not
create a fantastical world; it simply deals with uncanny events in the real one. What remains the
same is the existence of the figure of “the reader”, although in this case, it is not the narrator who
is the reader, but an enemy of his. The reader and his text – which in this case, is a poem he
writes – is the subject of the narrator‟s harsh critical evaluation.
“The Aleph” tells the story of a fictionalized version of Borges (as in “Tlön, Uqbar”) who
is mourning the death of a woman named Beatriz Viterbo. It is made clear that she and he had a
romantic relationship; the name Beatriz is an obvious allusion to Dante‟s Beatrice. He stops by
her house on her birthday for several years after her passing. When doing this, he pays respects
to her cousin, Carlos Argentino Daneri. Carlos seems to be his literary rival: he shows Borges
one of his poems, which Borges scathingly critiques (to himself – it is part of a running inner
dialogue that comprises the narrative). One day, Daneri mentions that his house is going to be
torn down by a nearby bar looking to expand. This is a source of terrible anguish for him, as it
contains an Aleph. Daneri explains what an Aleph is to Borges, who believes him to be mad.
Daneri then offers Borges a look into it. Borges experiences the wonders of peering into infinity,
but later claims that the Aleph is a false Aleph.
As mentioned, I believe Daneri‟s poem is the text with which he engages as “the reader”.
The fact that he is also its author does not negate the fact that this could be the text; in fact,
because I am arguing for the analogy between the reader-text relationship of these stories and the
mind- universe relationship of Berkeley‟s immaterialism, it follows that the reader would

Stamm 33
literally create the text, because in immaterialism, the mind creates the universe. I would argue
that that the Aleph represents here is infinite reality created by the immaterialist God. It has
already been noted that God‟s mind is the ultimate mind, perceiving everything in existence
forever. This is precisely the function of the Aleph.
The fact that Daneri owns an Aleph leads him to identify with God: through this object,
he has the power to see everything. I would argue that Daneri actually is a God, functionally
speaking, and that out of mortal spite (and, perhaps, jealousy of his literary prowess) Borges
finishes the story by claiming that the Aleph is a fake Aleph. There are several clues within the
text that demonstrate that Daneri‟s power, as provided by his Aleph, can be associated with the
God of immaterialist philosophy. First of all, the epic poetic text he creates is called “The Earth”:
“First, he said, he opened the floodgates of his fancy; then, taking up hand tools, he resorted to
the file. The poem was entitled The Earth; it consisted of a description of the planet, and, of
course, lacked no amount of picturesque digressions and bold apostrophes.” (17-18). Regardless
of the narrator‟s distaste for Daneri‟s poem, the fact that Daneri is toiling toward a poetic
description of the entire planet is remarkable. This is before he reveals the fact that he owns an
Aleph; but it speaks to a certain quality of omniscience. Nowhere is it ever mentioned that
Daneri would fabricate a detail of the planet, in all of its minute intricacies – only that he would
give it the poetic treatment. Although the narrator believes the descriptions of the planet to be
mere “picturesque digressions,” they are presented in the story as the work of one with access to
viewing infinity – to an Aleph. The narrator notes that he “had in mind to set to verse the face of
an entire planet” and outlines his progress as such:
By 1941, he had already dispatched a number of acres of the State of Queensland,
nearly a mile of the course run by the River Ob, a gasworks to the north of

Stamm 34
Veracruz, the leading shops in the Buenos Aires parish of Concepcion, the villa of
Mariana Cambaceres de Alvear in the Belgrano section of the Argentine Capital,
and a Turkish baths establishment not far from the well-known Brighton
Aquarium (19-20).
These things are not noted as fancies or digressions: within the text, there is no indication that
Daneri has made up their existence. I believe that the reader of “The Aleph” is meant to assume
that these places are real places, and Daneri is familiar with them. They are simply listed as what
has already fallen under his pen. I also think it is significant that the act of writing is referred to
as “dispatching a number of acres.” This is an unusual way of describing poetry-writing; it is as
if, in the act of writing, Daneri is actually “dispatching acres of land”.
In spite of the narrator‟s distaste for The Earth, it winds up garnering great reviews. It is
noted toward the story‟s end that it wins a prestigious award:
It is redundant now to repeat what happened. Carlos Argentino Daneri won the
Second National Prize for Literature [this is qualified by a footnote that recounts
Daneri‟s pompous response to Borges‟s “pained congratulations on receiving this
note]. First prize went to Dr. Aita; Third Prize, to Mario Bonafenti. My own book
The Sharper’s Cards did not get a single vote. Once again dullness and envy had
their triumph! (29).
This constitutes further evidence for the fact that the narrator‟s dislike of Daneri is merely a
projection of his own strife. Whereas his commentary on the poem is initially amusing, and the
reader is inclined to side with the narrator against Daneri, by the end, it seems quite obvious that
his grief and anger over losing Beatriz clouds his assessment of her cousin. While Daneri is
portrayed as a self-important, arrogant writer, this “flaw” ultimately looks like a spiteful

Stamm 35
portrayal by an envious and mournful acquaintance working in the same profession. This is what
leads the character Borges to come to the conclusion that the Aleph is not actually what it seems.
It seems that this section actually outlines the surfacing of the narrator‟s anger at God and
at the reality of an infinite universe, as those things have transpired to take his beloved Beatriz
from him. He certainly dislikes the concept of the movement of time. While Daneri speaks
excitedly of modern innovations that will allow for “the mountain” to come to “the modern
Muhammad” (17) Borges sees these innovations as “foolish” and distasteful – fanciful in such a
way that he “linked them at once to literature” (17). Borges also notes that the bar which is
expanding into Daneri‟s property is “ruthlessly modern” (“Aleph” 20). The most significant clue
that the passage of time causes him distress, however, is at the very beginning:
On the burning February morning Beatriz Viterbo died, after braving an agony
that never for a single moment gave way to self-pity or fear, I noticed that the
sidewalk billboards around Constitution Plaza were advertising some new brand
or other of American cigarettes. The fact pained me, for I realized that the wide
and ceaseless universe was already slipping away from her and that this slight
change was the first of an endless series. The universe may change but not me, I
thought with a certain sad vanity. (15)
The narrator‟s pain never gives way to self-pity or fear, but it does give way to horror at the
reality of time, which is that it will march forward without Beatriz. I believe it is critical for the
story that this is related at the beginning: the fact of the narrator‟s anger at the passage of time, at
reality, and at God, is what everything else is contingent upon. Something as seemingly
insignificant as a sidewalk advertisement represents, for the narrator, something as large as the
cruelty of time‟s passing. This is the most significant indicator of the narrator‟s anger at time,

Stamm 36
because it is the first, but it is the first of a series. It seems that his grief over his loss, and his
anger at the reality of the world is magnified over the years. His visits to Beatriz‟s family‟s house
on her birthday get longer each year (16); the final sentence of the story also refers to Beatriz.
This offers an explanation for his distaste at Daneri and „The Earth”. As a family
member, Daneri is already permanently associated with Beatriz; Beatriz is the only reason
Borges and Daneri ever meet. I believe that Daneri‟s claims over infinity, via his ownership of
the Aleph, are too much for Borges: Daneri is not only a relative of Beatriz, and therefore is
associated with a great deal of pain, but the Aleph makes him a God-like figure. I would argue
that Borges has to dislike him, and to doubt the truth of the Aleph, even in the face of his
encounters with it.
What is particularly telling is that Borges initially accepts that the Aleph is, in fact, the
true Aleph. He only rescinds this assessment after discovering that Daneri won a major literary
prize for his poem. His rejection of the reality of Daneri‟s Aleph is because he believes he has
found sources for another true Aleph, although the circumstances surrounding his research of the
true Aleph are questionable. The story‟s ending outlines several possibilities for the existence of
the Aleph elsewhere, although they all come from the manuscript of one “Captain Burton [who]
held the post of British Consul in Brazil” in 1867 (30). This is an outright acceptance of
secondhand evidence over empirical experience for the existence of the Aleph, and seems like a
stretch made on the part of a man who has an emotional stake in not believing in it.
Borges does not wish to contend with the reality of mortal life, as he must live it without
Beatriz Viterbo. More significantly, he rejects the idea of infinity and God. For him, they are
cruel, as they represent change; he resolves not to change, as a statement against the reality of
time‟s passing and the cruelty of an infinite universe. I might reiterate that due to the possession

Stamm 37
of the Aleph, Daneri is a symbol for all that brings Borges pain: Daneri is Beatriz‟s relative, and
has access to knowledge that makes him, functionally speaking, a sort of God and master of fate
(at least, he is privy to understanding the future, as well as the perfect reality of the past). He
comes to stand for a symbol for the immaterialist God, who perceives everything in existence, all
at the same time. Borges, by contrast, is only a mortal man – defined in immaterialism as one
who has a fractional understanding of the universe (he is also a less-accomplished author!). This
perception is what creates it; hence Daneri fills the role of the immaterialist God.
Berkeley is very clear in his declaration that a higher power is necessary to create the
universe. This is because human minds alone cannot possibly comprehend infinity; only God
can. A passage from his book Three Dialogues Between Hylas And Philonous explains how this
works:
Now you must call imagination to your aid. The feeble narrow sense cannot
descry innumerable worlds revolving round the central fires; and in those worlds
the energy of an all-perfect Mind displayed in endless forms. But, neither sense
nor imagination are big enough to comprehend the boundless extent, with all its
glittering furniture. (63)
What I believe Berkeley is stating is that the human mind – or “the feeble narrow sense” that is
“imagination”- cannot possibly have any working handle on infinity. This statement ends a
reverent and heartfelt description of the glory of the totality of nature. The point of this
description is to indicate that there is no way one person could absorb it all; it is infinitely old
and vast, and the glories of life on Earth are an infinitesimal bit of the infinite universe. The
speaker, Philonous, is trying to convince his acquaintance Hylas of the fact that reality exists
within the mind – and that each individual‟s version of the universe is only his or her slice of

Stamm 38
infinity, and is necessarily limited. The only being privy to all of it is the higher power. The text
continues:
Though the laboring mind exert and strain each power to its utmost reach, there
still stands out ungrasped a surplusage inmeasurable. Yet all the vast bodies that
compose this mighty frame, how distant and remote soever, are by some secret
mechanism, some divine art and force, linked in a mutual dependence and
intercourse with each other, even with this earth, which was almost slipt from my
thoughts and lost in the crowd of worlds ( 63).
The “divine art and force”, of course, is God – since Berkeley was a Christian philosopher, God
was a necessary part of his worldview. Berkeley‟s basic argument that the reality of the universe
exists within the mind stipulates that God is necessary. There needs to be a mind that exists when
to perceive – i.e., create – the universe. No finite mortal being could ever do this. What defines
God, according to immaterliast philosophy, therefore, is the ability to perceive infinity. In reality,
no human could possibly do this; in the world of “The Aleph,” this human is Daneri.
As “the reader” figure of this story, Daneri also “creates” the reality of the text with
which he engages, which is his poem “The Earth”. I believe this to be a significant clue to the
fact that Daneri is meant to be understood as analogous to God. The reader-text relationship in
this story is a metaphor for the role of God in immaterialism: God is the one who creates every
object in the infinite universe by perceiving it. Daneri‟s writing of “The Earth” is a metaphor for
God‟s “writing of the planet.” This is supported by the way he uses language in the poem: his
poetics are ornate and flowery, perhaps overwritten (Borges declares a deep distaste for it). I
believe that his use of an expansive vocabulary reflects the fact that each word stands for

Stamm 39
something slightly different. As a world author, the more words he uses, the larger and more
diverse his world becomes. He even invents new words to fit specific situations. The story reads:
He then reread me four or five different fragments of the poem. He had revised
them following his pet principle of verbal ostentation: where at first “blue” had
been good enough, he now wallowed in “azures,” “ceruleans,” and
“ultramarines”. The word “milky” was too easy for him; in the course of an
impassioned description of a shed where wool was washed, he chose words such
as “lacteal,” “lactescent,” and even made one up – “lactinacious”(20-21).
As the creator of both the planet and “The Earth”, his “pet principle of verbal ostentation” is
actually the principle by which he makes use of his raw creative materials: words. As each place
on earth, and each experience on earth, is slightly different, so each one might – for its creator –
necessitate the invention of new words. After all, “azure”, “cerulean”, and “ultramarine” all refer
to different hues. This isn‟t to Borges‟s taste, and indeed would probably not make for the best
poet by any standards. But as Daneri‟s role is not principally that of a poet, but one who has
access to infinity, and is a symbol for God, it makes perfect sense.
One feature of the story that reflects the immaterialist conception of God is the name of
the titular object: “The Aleph” is noted as being an important Hebrew letter, a fact that is
revealed only toward the end of the story:
I want to add two final observations: one, on the nature of the Aleph; the other, on
its name. As is well known, the Aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet. Its
use for the strange sphere in my story may not be accidental. For the Kabbala, that
letter stands for the En Soph, the pure and boundless godhead; it is also said that it

Stamm 40
takes the shape of a man pointing to both heaven and earth, in order to show that
the lower world is a map and mirror of the higher (29).
I would argue that the use of the Hebrew alphabet‟s first letter as the name of the “strange
sphere” is not accidental at all. This appears to reflect the fact that God is the primary constituent
of the universe; the thing that comes before all other objects and experiences – God is first. The
use of the name “aleph” in this story is identical to its use as a symbol in Kabbalah – the “strange
sphere” contains infinity, and the symbol represents infinity. Although he indicates the
connection, Borges wonders as to the origin of Daneri‟s “decision” to use the name Aleph – as if
it were another one of his passing fancies and could be easily substituted by other words: “I
wonder whether Carlos Argentino [Daneri] chose that name or whether he read it”, he muses,
directly before launching into his analysis of why he believes the Aleph to be false.
The reader-text relationship in “The Aleph” is definitely altered by the fact that the
narrator has a strained relationship to the reader figure. Readers of “The Aleph” cannot be sure
exactly what to make of Daneri and his Aleph. Of course, the point is not to understand the
relationship between Borges and Daneri. What is significant about it in terms of the larger
genealogy is the treatment of the reader/text relationship, the relationship also seen in “Library
Of Babel” and “Tlön, Uqbar”. In those stories, the reader is the narrator, a human figure whose
texts (the Anglo-American Cyclopaedias and the texts of the Library) constituted his subjective,
partial version of reality (following the immaterialist tenets). In this story, the “reader” is a Godlike figure who creates the world (in the poem “The Earth”) and has access to understanding
everything within infinity.
The reader/text trope is further considered with in Borges‟s story “Pierre Menard, Author
of The Quixote.” As in “The Aleph,” “the reader” of this story is not the narrator. It is the titular

Stamm 41
character, a poet named Pierre Menard. Another similarity between “Pierre Menard” and “The
Aleph” is that the reader‟s text, in the former case, is one he has actually written. What
distinguishes “Pierre Menard” from the stories that have been discussed as well as from the
greater body of literature that examines reader-text relationships is that the reader‟s relationship
to the text is, by all accounts, technically impossible.
The narrator of “Pierre Menard” holds a deep reverence for Menard, who is identified as
a deceased poet. The story consists of an account of Menard‟s attempt to rewrite Miguel
Cervantes‟s Don Quixote. He does not mean to retell it or rework it in a more modern light:
Menard quite literally wants to rewrite Don Quixote, that is, he hopes to reproduce it word for
word. He commits himself to doing this completely from his own mind. The narrator sets out to
explain why this mission, as magical and patently Quixotic as it seems, is not absurd for Menard.
This explanation consists of ruminations on the nature of time and memory, and champions
Menard as one who radically reconceived of the notion of reading. This new take on reading
assumes that the “truth” or “reality” of a text depends at least as much on who wrote it as on its
actual content:
To be, in the twentieth century, a popular novelist of the seventeenth seemed to
him a diminution. To be, in some way, Cervantes and reach the Quixote seemed
less ardous to him – and, consequently, less interesting – than to go on being
Pierre Menard and reach the Quixote through the experiences of Pierre Menard.
(This conviction, we might say in passing, made him omit the autobiographic
prologue to the second part of Don Quixote. To include that prologue would have
been to create another character – Cervantes – but it would also have meant

Stamm 42
presenting the Quixote in terms of that character and not of Menard. The latter,
naturally, declined that facility.) (40)
This, of course, is immaterialist; it places the truth and reality of a novel, short story, or poem not
in the actual content of the work, but inside its creator, just as the truth or reality of a situation is
to be found inside the minds of those who perceive it (instead of in the events and particulars of
the situation). Of course, what is significant here is that in reproducing the work, Menard
assumes the role of its creator. In reproducing the text, he recreates its meaning for himself,
instead of accessing it through the figure of Cervantes.
What is distinctive about this story is that it is essentially about the theory that reality is
produced inside the human mind. Whereas “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius,” “The Library of
Babel,” and “The Aleph” used basic immaterialist concepts as narrative points, the entire drive of
“Pierre Menard” is toward an explanation grounded in Berkeley‟s philosophy. While “Tlön,
Uqbar” imagines a place that operates according to immaterialist precepts, using specific aspects
of a fantasy world as metaphors for elements of the Berkeley‟s argument, the “truth” of
immaterialism is always in question. After all, Tlön is never confirmed to be a real place. Even
when it seems to affect the reality of Earth, it is always suggested that Tlön might not actually
exist, and the indicators of Tlön‟s existence in the real world are simply the products of the mind
of a narrator who is devoting a great deal of time to uncovering the mystery of Tlön‟s origins.
The effects Tlön has on earth do not constitute empirical evidence; they are merely uncanny
events that may or may not have anything to do with Tlön, Uqbar, or Orbis Tertius.
In “Pierre Menard,” however, the narrator believes strongly in the immaterialist
philosophy: it is his rationalization for the seemingly supernatural powers of Menard. The fact
that the narrator takes the philosophy of immaterialism as his personal belief and worldview

Stamm 43
makes immaterialism the functional framework for the short story: the reader has no choice but
to accept the narrator‟s account of the poet‟s work and his explanation for it. This, then, is the
internal logic of the text. It stipulates that immaterialist occasions – i.e, the ability to create an
exact replica of a text purely from one‟s mind – are factual events. Because of this, I would argue
that “Pierre Menard” is the closest story, of the four, to containing magic. The reader has to
suspend disbelief in something that he or she cannot know to be true: the philosophy of
immaterialism
What is ironic about this, of course, is that the very thing the reader has to suspend
disbelief is is the notion that reality is subjective – essentially, readers of “Pierre Menard” have
to believe that they “believe” in everything they know to be reality, as opposed to “knowing” it
to be true. The fantastical thing here is not a mythical creature or deity: it is everyday reality,
because, like a story, it is fabricated by the mind. Immaterialism argues against the possible
existence of factors outside one‟s mind that confirm one‟s sense impressions (God is the only
factor outside one‟s mind that has anything to do with the reality of sense impressions). It is the
ultimate “belief system,” as it operates entirely on the idea that reality is a mental construct,
entirely comprised of beliefs – or acts of faith in the unknowable- that arise from sense
impressions (which come from God). Whereas other instances of magic in literature might ask
the reader to suspend their disbelief the reality of mythical creatures, divine missions, ghosts,
gods, or goddesses, “Pierre Menard” asks the reader to ascribe to a philosophy that questions the
nature of knowable reality. The result is a story that poses complex philosophical questions, all
in the name of an exploration into what it means to be a reader, and how (or if) the world of the
text is different from the world outside the text.

Stamm 44
Borges‟s choice of Don Quixote as the text that Menard reproduces reflects the fact that
the story is a drive toward an immaterialist explanation of an otherwise unbelievable
supernatural literary event. As noted before, Menard‟s undertaking is deeply quixotic: it is a
highly idealistic and impracticable strive toward a goal founded around experiences with
literature. I believe that Borges conceived of Menard as a sort of modern-day Don Quixote. The
difference between Quixote and Menard is that what made others believe Quixote to be “mad” is
what gives Menard his special powers: his unwavering belief that the way in which he views the
world is the correct way. Belief in one‟s own reality as something that operates separately from
the realities of others, or of the past, is exactly what allows for Menard to accomplish his feat.
The fact that belief allows for what is believed-in to exist creates the situation of “Pierre
Menard,” in which immaterialism is made “real.” As an act of the mind, belief serves to create
the reality of the believer. Therefore, if Pierre Menard has managed to convince himself of the
fact that he is able to reproduce Don Quixote word for word, he will be able to do it. The
challenge here seems not to be the fact that this feat is absurd, but the fact that allowing oneself
to believe that it is not absurd would be a very difficult obstacle to overcome. This radical act of
belief in oneself would be called insanity by all standards; this textually based “insanity” is the
subject of both Cervantes‟s novel and Borges‟s short story.
Another reason we can see Menard to be a modern-day Quixote is that his own reconception of the reading process would very much allow him to be so; in fact, it would be
fitting. This is the new approach to literature which the narrator passionately praises throughout
the course of the narrative. Menard‟s literary approach gives no serious weight to chronology,
authorship, or greater cultural setting of a work. It is about one‟s own belief in the world of the
text. A pertinent passage reads as follows:

Stamm 45
Menard (perhaps without wanting to) has enriched, by means of a new technique, the
halting and rudimentary art of reading: this new technique is that of the deliberate
anachronism and the erroneous attribution. This technique, whose applications are
infinite, prompts us to go through the Odyssey as if it were posterior to the Aeneid and the
book Le jardin du Centaure by Madame Henri Bachelier as if it were by Madame Henri
Bachelier. This technique fills the most placid works with adventure. To attribute the
Imitatio Christi to Louis Ferdinand Céline or to James Joyce, is this not a sufficient
renovation of its tenuous spiritual indications? (44)
The application of this logic of reading to the real world would mean that if Menard wanted to
imagine himself as Don Quixote, or as Cervantes, that desire would be as good as declaring the
fact true. I would argue that Borges wanted the reader of “Pierre Menard” to believe that the
story‟s treatment of immaterialism implies that Menard‟s literary approach functions beyond the
literary world, as well. This would imply that the ideas of immaterialism are active in the story in
places beyond Menard‟s literary opinions. This activity might be seen, for example, in the idea
that belief in oneself can give one powers that seem magical. Ultimately, Menard champions the
magic in the power a text has over a reader beyond a rational or critical approach to engaging
with literature. He strongly dislikes the fact that critical analysis is lauded as the traditionally
“correct” way to begin to make sense of a work of literature. The following passage, which cites
a letter from Menard to the narrator, demonstrates this:
Thinking, analyzing, inventing (he also wrote me) are not anomalous acts; they
are the normal respiration of the intelligence. To glorify the occasional
performance of that function, to hoard ancient and alien thoughts, to recall with
incredulous stupor that the doctor universalis thought, is to confess our laziness or

Stamm 46
our barbarity. Every man should be capable of all ideas and I understand that in
the future this will be the case. (37)
Here, Menard is arguing against the over-glorification of thinking, analyzing, and inventing. He
equates them with typical human functions – they are “the normal respiration of the
intelligence”- and, because they are ordinary and commonplace, they should not be glorified. In
stating that to venerate these functions is to “confess our laziness or our barbarity” I believe he is
stating that the act of glorification of analysis implies that mental work is praiseworthy on the
basis of how atypical it is. Analysis, here, is envisioned as a natural state of mind: Menard
believes that thinking and analyzing are ordinary human functions. As such, they are not worthy
of any special honors. His understanding of the act of reading reflects this.
His approach to reading gives little weight to historical analysis or the critical appraisal of
others. It calls for a commitment to a text that does not refer to any bit of knowledge from the
past, from literary criticism, or any source outside the text otherwise. It throws off the entire
concept of textual interpretation, instead stating that what is contained inside the text is all there
is to it – and that all that is there is what a reader reads “into” it. The text is thus “created” by a
reader, just as the world is “created” by the human mind, according to Berkeley. The pages of
history, Menard would argue, only mar the purity of a work, as a body of potential
interpretations and new versions add up. These additions to the work only skew the pure
impressions received by a reader‟s engagement with the original work, which has relevance
entirely outside of any appraisal of its author, its culture, or historical reality otherwise.
Ultimately, the relevance and meaning of a text is outside of time. Toward the end of the story,
the narrator offers a window into Menard‟s ideas of what it means to read:

Stamm 47
There is no exercise of the intellect which is not, in the final analysis, useless. A
philosophical doctrine begins as a plausible description of the universe; with the
passage of the years it becomes a mere new chapter – if not a paragraph or a name
– in the history of philosophy. In literature, this eventual caducity is even more
notorious. The Quixote – Menard told me – was, above all, an entertaining book;
now it is the occasion for patriotic toasts, grammatical insolence and obscene
deluxe editions. Fame is a form of incomprehension, perhaps the worst. (43).
Menard‟s assessment of the passage of time is, in a sense, anti-time. The observation that
“there is no exercise of the intellect which is not, in the final analysis, useless” indicates the fact
that time renders all intellectual exercises outmoded at one point or another. The narrator
indicates that Menard is familiar with the ways in which this has been manifested, and will
continue to be manifested, throughout intellectual history. The fact that time diminishes the
magnitude of importance of a work – novels, short stories, poems and essays can only be
considered innovative for a limited amount of time – disturbs Menard greatly. I believe this
disturbance is the point from where Menard drew inspiration for his undertaking. The narrator
notes that Menard‟s frustration with time is not particularly unique; what is unique, he says, is
what the frustration brought forth: “There is nothing new in these nihilistic verifications; what is
singular is the determination Menard drew from them” (43).
What the narrator finds distinctive about Menard‟s determination is the fact that it led
him to be able to reproduce parts of Don Quixote. What is admirable, he is saying, is not that he
was troubled by the effect of time‟s passage on a text; it was that he set himself to solve this
problem, in a sense, through an act of the mind. This mental act came in the form of recreating
the text in a pure form, purely through an act of will. This demonstration of will would serve to

Stamm 48
prove that the human mind, as an agent of creation, has power over a text greater than anything
the forces of time, culture, and criticism could force over one‟s reading. This is, of course,
immaterialist; it implies that the act of reading creates the text. But Menard‟s goal pushes this
idea to new limits: his ambition is so strongly immaterialist that it breaks down the barriers
between reading and writing, making it possible to “write” an already-written text. Instead of the
reader figure who “writes” a text by creating individual meaning from reading (which is a
metaphor for the human mind that creates its own subjective reality), Menard‟s will – or the
“individual meaning” he derives from his life as a reader and writer – is what actually serves to
create the text.
This individual meaning is a stance, ultimately, against pre-determination. Menard notes
that he selected Don Quixote as the text to reproduce because it felt, unlike other favorite works
of his, “contingent”, as if it were the result of chance and not a “necessary” act of literature. He
claims that works by his other favorite writers, such as Poe, Baudelaire, and Mallarme seemed
“inevitable” (“Pierre Menard” 41), as if there is a line of causality that links certain events
together to create great literature. It is this assumed causality that Menard wants to act against.
He seems to be fundamentally against the idea that every effect has a cause; he sets out to create
an “effect” (the recreation of Don Quixote) without a cause (the act of word-for-word
transcription that would create a perfect copy).
Immaterialism is a sort of anti-causal philosophy. Because it places reality within the
individual human, who constructs his or her version of the world inside their own minds, the
identification of a chain of cause and effect as an explanation for an event (or series of events)
would only be meaningful to the extent that one actually believed in the cause-effect chain. What
is critical here is the act of belief in a concept, idea, or impression: it is a mental operation that,

Stamm 49
according to idealism, is what makes something “real” (because reality is only as “real” as the
human mind allows it to be). Therefore, Menard‟s rejection of cause and effect is in line with his
overall immaterialist approach to the acts of reading and writing.
Menard‟s anti-causal stance is demonstrated in his selection of Don Quixote for his aim.
The narrator elucidates: “But why precisely the Quixote? our reader will ask. Such a preference,
in a Spaniard, would not have been inexplicable; but it is, no doubt, in a Symbolist from Nimes,
essentially a devotee of Poe, who engendered Baudelaire, who engendered Mallarme, who
engendered Valery, who engendered Edmond Teste.” (“Pierre Menard” 40-41). The fact that the
narrator establishes a lineage that begins with Poe and ends with Edmond Teste speaks to the
concept of a causal line which, according to him, makes the existence of certain great literary
works “necessary.” Baudelaire, Mallarme, Valery, and Teste‟s works were “necessary” acts of
literature; their existence, the narrator offers, is due to a logical progression of literary creation.
Menard argues against this logical progression, as the result of causality, because causality is a
function of time. He strongly believed that the passage of time tarnished a “pure” encounter with
all texts. This is because of the cloud of praise, criticism, new editions, re-workings, and so on,
that surround an original work and cast their own light on it. For Menard, Poe, Baudelaire,
Mallarme, Valery, and Teste exist within time – within a framework by which their reading will
always be informed by factors beyond the control of the writer. Menard sees Cervantes as
writing outside of time. Therefore, he had ultimate control over his work – ultimate authorship.
Menard quite clearly wanted this control, too. This, of course, is ironic – the only way in which
Menard believes he can have ultimate control over a text is to reproduce somebody else‟s work.
The explanation for his choice of Don Quixote continues:

Stamm 50
The aforementioned letter illustrates this point. “The Quixote,” clarifies Menard,
“interests me deeply, but it does not seem – how shall I say it? – inevitable. I
cannot imagine the universe without Edgar Allen Poe‟s exclamation Ah, bear in
mind this garden was enchanted or without the Bateau ivre or the Ancient
Mariner, but I am Quite capable of imagining it without the Quixote. (I speak,
naturally, of my personal capacity and not of those works‟ historical relevance).
The Quixote is a contingent book; the Quixote is unnecessary. (41)
What I believe is most critical in this excerpt is the fact that Menard notes that he speaks
“naturally, of my personal capacity and not of these works‟ historical relevance.” He is not
saying that Don Quixote holds a privileged place outside of inevitability on the basis of anything
other than his own memory. The basis for its contingency is within his psyche. Just as his mind is
the source that identifies the “necessity” of Baudelaire et. Al., the “contingency” of Baudelaire is
only real because this is his opinion.
This is in line with Menard‟s understanding of history, which seems to negate the concept
of truth or untruth as qualities with their basis in historical fact. “Truth,” for Menard, is merely
what is believed to be true by the individual. Just as Poe, Baudelaire, and Mallarme are all part of
the same line - which Menard understands as his own lineage, not a lineage agreed on by
scholars or of which he read in a textbook somewhere – historical facts are merely what we
believe them to be. The narrator explains: “Menard, a contemporary of William James, does not
define history as an inquiry into reality but as its origin. Historical truth, for him, is not what has
happened; it is what we judge to have happened. The final phrases – exemplar and adviser to the
present, and the future’s counselor – are brazenly pragmatic.” (43)

Stamm 51
I believe that in mentioning that history for Menard is not defined as an “inquiry into reality” but
as “its origin”, the narrator is noting that history is merely a chronology of a series of subjective
ideas and impressions. To define history as an “inquiry into reality” is to imply that reality is
something that exists as an entity outside of oneself, something to be inquired into. This
“something” might be understood as objective truth. If it is outside of one‟s mind, it can be
investigated as a means of discovering its objective qualities. This stands against what he is
stating about Menard‟s definition of history as an origin of reality. The understanding of history
as reality‟s origin is an indicator that one takes concepts from history as a starting point from
which to begin constructing one‟s subjective version of present reality. Menard‟s assessment of
literary history leads him to see Don Quixote as different from works by many other writers:
what is key is that he understands that this assessment of history is, of course, his reality and
nobody else‟s.
“Pierre Menard” is made more complex when the narrator reveals that the reconstructed
text of Don Quixote has not actually survived Pierre Menard. This revelation casts the rest of the
story into a new light: the reader understands that, just as Pierre Menard was driven by a personal
opinion regarding Don Quixote (the idea that it is contingent), the narrator is driven by an
equally personal and subjective opinion about Menard. Just as Menard “writes” the Quixote of
Cervantes, the narrator “writes” the Quixote of Pierre Menard. I would argue that the story
becomes a meditation on the way in which each reader “creates” his favorite texts or authors.
The narrator‟s appreciation for Menard leads him to assume that he was successful in his goal.
Not only that, he seems unperturbed by the fact that this mythical text no longer exists. The story
reads:

Stamm 52
He decided to anticipate the vanity awaiting all of man‟s efforts; he set himself to
an undertaking which was exceedingly complex and, from the very beginning,
false. He dedicated his scruples and his sleepless nights to repeating an already
extant book in an alien tongue. He multiplied draft upon draft, and revised
tenaciously and tore up thousand of manuscript pages. He did not let anyone
examine these drafts and took care that they should not survive him. In vain I
have tried to reconstruct them. (42-43)
The narrator‟s identification of the undertaking as “false” is crucial here. The narrator does not
elaborate on what he means by “false” – it is unclear whether he believes that Menard actually
did not reconstruct Don Quixote or of he thinks that the undertaking itself was a sort of
falsification of what is realistically possible. All other evidence from “Pierre Menard” seems to
indicate that the narrator believes that he really did reconstruct Don Quixote.
What I believe is significant about this passage, though, is that it actually renders the
question of whether Menard actually accomplished his goal meaningless. The “point” of the
Quixote‟s reconstruction, the idea for which the narrator deifies Menard, is not to be found in the
factual reality of the text. It is in what Menard‟s goal implies for the act of reading. I believe the
narrator sees the declaration of Menard‟s ambition as a statement on the fact that reading is
creative and functions outside of what any history-based understanding could bring to the act of
engagement with work of literature. The creative powers of reading are, of course, part of the
story of Don Quixote, where the protagonist‟s entire view of reality is created by his view of the
novels he loves. This is the sort of literary encounter championed by Menard, who in trying to
reproduce the Quixote word-for-word was, I believe, trying to indicate the lack of difference
between the world of the text and the world of the reader‟s mind.

Stamm 53
This is reflected in the fact that the narrator, in a sense, “creates” Menard. As far as the
reader of the story is concerned, the only “real” view of Menard is the narrator‟s view. There is
no access to the reality of who Menard was or what his writing was really like except through the
narrator. In this sense, the narrator has the same relationship to Menard that Menard has to Don
Quixote. This is why the fact that there is no surviving copy of Menard‟s reconstruction of Don
Quixote is so important: it brings the story full circle. Although the story leads toward an
immaterialist rationalization for skills of the titular poet, I would argue that it is not “about”
immaterialism. If it can be said to be about anything, like the other texts confronted thus far, it is
about the relationship between a reader and a text. What makes “Pierre Menard” a particularly
fascinating case is the fact that the narrator understands what is at the core of the reader-text
relationship. This is, obviously, true for his personal reader-text relationship (his relationship to
Menard‟s reproduced Quixote) but it is the same as the issue at hand in all of the stories.
What is central to this kind of relationship between a reader and a text – the relationship
that I believe is the subject of “Tlön, Uqbar”, “Library Of Babel”, “The Aleph”, and “Pierre
Menard” – is that the reader creates the text. He or they create(s) the text by reading themselves
“into” it. Their minds are the functional authors of the work. “The reader” (or “readers”) figure
in each work is fully enveloped in the world of the text. This is why I use the term “relationship”
to describe the workings between the reader and the text: it is as personal and life-encompassing
as a relationship two people might have with each other.
The text, then, becomes the entire framework for the reader‟s life – this is because it is
their life, functionally speaking. I believe that there is no practical distinction between the
reader‟s book and the reader‟s life, in these stories. Both are projections of the reader‟s mind.
Details surrounding the creation and origin of the text in question have little bearing on its

Stamm 54
immediate interpretation for the reader. Each of these stories contends with the idea that
accuracy of historical facts of a works‟ origin is not actually provable. The origins of the Tlön
Encyclopaedias is the mystery that drives the entire story; while the narrator discovers certain
truths about their fabrication, the essential mystery of Tlön and its surroundings remains a
mystery by the story‟s end. The origin of the Library of Babel is never referred to specifically; it
rests upon the idea that the Library is really just a metaphor for something much larger than
itself. The text of “The Aleph” is being written throughout the course of a story and so has no
verifiable (or unverifiable) historical facts surrounding it; and of course, it is very possible that
the text under scrutiny in “Pierre Menard” might never have existed to begin with.
The texts of these stories are not really novels, poems, libraries or short stories at all: they
are operations of the mind of “the reader” figure that is in all of them. Each story is a rumination
on the idea that human reality is completely relative to individual experience. This individual
experience is made up of sense impressions that are put together in the mind of the individual to
create their own version of the world. Borges took this idea directly from A Treatise Concerning
Principles Of Human Knowledge and applied it to the idea of reading. This application took “the
world of sense impressions” to be the “text” and the “human mind” that synthesizes its own
reality to be “the reader”.
I believe the use of immaterialism as the theoretical background for metafictional works
has important implications for the possibilities of its reception and interpretations. The
philosophy states that reality is a different experience for every individual. The use of
immaterialism as a theme and framework for non- metafictional novels and short stories might
look like a story that deals with, say, characters who realize that they can never find objective
truth. However, I believe that because these works are metafictional, the use of immaterialism

Stamm 55
has implications that apply not just to their characters and plotlines, but to the way in which they
are received by a reader. Metafictional works contain commentary on the nature of fiction in
general – how it should be read, what its function is, and the general role it plays in human life. I
believe that the commentary contained in the selected works of Calvino, Nabokov, and Acker
affects a reader‟s response to the work. This response mirrors the philosophy for which George
Berkeley argued in A Treatise Concerning Principles of Human Knowledge. It is a response
based purely on the individual, rendering the idea of “correct” or “incorrect” interpretation
meaningless. Whatever a reader brings to their reading of Pale Fire, If On A Winter’ Night A
Traveler and Don Quixote is the “correct” reading of it. Each of these stories contains a figure
(or figures) that are attempting to derive meaning from a text that serves as a metaphor for their
life. I believe that readers of these works assume the same position as “the reader” figure in these
works.

Stamm 56
Part Two: The Borgesian Use of Berkeleyan Immaterialism in Vladimir Nabokov’s
Pale Fire
Vladimir Nabokov‟s novel Pale Fire is a useful place to begin discussing the influence of
Borges‟s short stories on fiction of the mid-to-late twentieth century. As with Kathy Acker‟s Don
Quixote and Italo Calvino‟s If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler, it takes as its subject the
relationship between a reader, or multiple readers, and a text, or texts. I believe that “the reader”
in Pale Fire “writes” the text that he reads; this is true of the “readers” in Don Quixote and If On
A Winter’s Night A Traveler as well. Of the three novels, Pale Fire is the most useful place to
begin demonstrating these links, I would argue, partially due to its intertextual relationship with
“Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius.” The fact that Pale Fire draws directly from “Tlön, Uqbar” is
significant because “Tlön, Uqbar” contains the most obvious references to Berkeley‟s
immaterialism as it is found within the short stories of Borges. As “Tlön, Uqbar” was a useful
point from which to embark on a discussion about Borges‟s connection to Berkeley, Pale Fire is
a useful point of departure for an explication of the lineage of metafictional techniques first seen
in Borges‟s short stories. The treatment of immaterialism in Pale Fire is exemplary of its
treatment in “Tlön, Uqbar.”
I have noted previously that Pale Fire takes as its framework the structure of the novel
discussed by the fictional Borges and Bioy Casares at the outset of “Tlön, Uqbar”: the tale
“whose narrator would omit or disfigure the facts and indulge in various contradictions which
would permit a few readers – very few readers – to perceive an atrocious or banal reality”
(“Tlön, Uqbar” 3). Of course, Pale Fire is not the only novel that features an unreliable narrator
who contradicts him-or-herself. I would argue that it relates closely to “Tlön, Uqbar” because it
not only operates according to the literary suggestions offered at the story‟s beginning, but it is

Stamm 57
essentially an exploration of the way in which reading a text can influence the reality of the
reader – and the way in which the facts of the reader‟s reality can influence the world of a text.
Pale Fire consists of three parts. The first is the foreword to the second part, which
consists of a 999 line autobiographical poem called “Pale Fire”. This foreword is written by a
colleague of the poem‟s author, a writer and college professor named John Shade. The colleague,
a younger professor and life-long aficionado of Shade‟s poetry, is named Charles Kinbote. The
men are neighbors and acquaintances; after Shade‟s death, Kinbote takes the task of overseeing
the posthumous publication of “Pale Fire”, which includes his commentary on the work. The
third part of the novel is Kinbote‟s commentary. It becomes apparent very quickly that Kinbote‟s
interpretation of “Pale Fire” is strongly informed by his almost fanatical admiration for Shade, a
veneration that seems to make him want to believe that he strongly influenced the content of the
poem. Individual phrases from the poem are singled out as issuing from experiences Shade had
with Kinbote; a single image is given pages of commentary about its assumed back story, which
seems to have little to do with the actual content of the poem. This back story comprises
narratives from Kinbote‟s supposed life and homeland, a fictional territory named Zembla. It
becomes immediately obvious that any connection the poem has to Zembla is simply the product
of Kinbote‟s wishful imagination.
Kinbote‟s commentary gradually strays from having relevance to Shade‟s poem to telling
the story of the fall of the last king of Zembla. This becomes an important subplot of the novel.
By all accounts, John Shade had nothing to do with Zembla outside of the interactions he has
with Kinbote. Kinbote‟s demonstrations of where he sees connections between individual
phrases within the poem and stories of Zembla he shares with John Shade makes him seem
deeply narcissistic. His understanding of himself as the source for a great writer‟s last work is

Stamm 58
founded on an appraisal of the poem that vastly overreaches and is grounded in a misconstrued
sense of the extent to which the two men were close.
The story of the last king of Zembla quickly transforms from ancillary information that
supports a reading of “Pale Fire” to a narrative that reflects on the conditions of the inner state of
Kinbote. Kinbote‟s narrative voice is very strong; as he outlines various occurrences from the
recent history of the Zemblan royal family, he makes clear his opinions and feelings toward each
event and its surrounding implications for all those affected by the king‟s deposition. In this
section, the reader actually gets two narratives: the explicit content, which tells a story of
revolution and political intrigue, and what I identify as the implicit content, which is the
increasingly-apparent fact of Kinbote‟s mental instability. There are places in the commentary
that have virtually nothing to do with the content of the poem: the ways in which Kinbote strays
from his express task leads the reader to understand that Kinbote is in some sort of emotionally
fraught condition, and that his commentary on “Pale Fire” reflects more about himself than it
does about John Shade or the actual content of the poem.
While it is never fully confirmed in the novel, the commentary gradually reveals the idea
that Kinbote himself might be the deposed monarch of Zembla, King Charles, living exiled and
in disguise in Appalachia, where he takes a job as a professor and meets John Shade. The reason
that this is questionable is because the commentary also indicates that Kinbote may be suffering
from mental delusions which lead him not only to a narcissistic view of his role in the creation of
“Pale Fire”, but to fabricate an identity as the former king of a country that does not actually
exist. Kinbote brings his experiences with “Pale Fire”, John Shade, and Zembla full circle when
he notes that a mistake made on the part of an assassin dispatched to murder him – or King

Stamm 59
Charles – is the reason for John Shade‟s death. The supposed assassin, Gradus, was
commissioned to take King Charles‟s life, but mistook Shade for Charles.
At the novel‟s end, the reader does not know whether he or she should believe Kinbote or
not; from the outset, he appears to be an unreliable narrator, and by its finish, it seems that
nothing he says is founded on a trustworthy understanding of reality. This creates a difficult
situation for the reader: Kinbote has been the reader‟s guide throughout the course of the entire
narrative. Such a figure as a guide makes the task of determining what is true in Pale Fire
incredibly difficult. The only other source for objective truth in Pale Fire, the novel by Nabokov,
is “Pale Fire”, the poem by John Shade, a mysterious work which, as mentioned before, seems to
have few logical connections to its commentators‟ notes on it. Understanding the events that
comprise Pale Fire‟s narrative is an immensely complex undertaking. It is difficult to summarily
describe what actually happens within the plot, because it seems that the questionability of
events and the nature of “truth” in literature and reality is precisely what the novel explores.
I would make the claim that the novel is largely about the relationship Kinbote has to
“Pale Fire”. This is, in essence, the same as the relationship between the reader figures of the
selected short stories of Borges and the texts they read. Ultimately, Kinbote does not read and
interpret “Pale Fire” so much as he “writes” it. What is in the text is for him no different than
what is within his psyche. He understands the metaphors and symbolic gestures of “Pale Fire” to
be reference markers to a series of events which had an obvious and profound impact on him.
The imagery and symbols of “Pale Fire” are so elusive, however, that it would not be difficult to
take interpretive liberties with it in the hopes of establishing a connection between the events of
the poem and any other series of events, more or less. Because the work is autobiographical, any
friend of Shade‟s could, conceivably, see him or herself as having influence over the text. The

Stamm 60
extent to which Kinbote reads himself into the text not only denies the significance of the actual
narrative of “Pale Fire”, but entirely supplants the story the poem tells with his own. The manner
in which Kinbote does this reveals him to be a disturbed individual. The degree to which he is
attached to Shade and his poem is an indicator of something far more sinister than the friendly
relationship between fellow scholars. It becomes progressively clearer throughout the novel that
Kinbote is mentally unstable – and that this is the story Nabokov is interested in telling.
His apparent psychological instability supports the idea of him creating the reality of the
text with his mind; it would seem that Kinbote creates every part of his reality with his mind –
and his reality has nothing to do with the extant reality of the universe. This extreme solipsism is
not, actually, what I believe Berkeley was arguing for in A Treatise Concerning Principles Of
Human Knowledge. Whereas Berkeley would say that God‟s mind creates the reality of the
world, an infinite and whole reality to which every human mind is privy to an individual and
subjective part, it is implied that Kinbote‟s understanding of the world has few reference points
to anything outside of his own mind. This is the nature of his implied madness: he is not living in
the real world, so to speak. However, the fact that Kinbote himself is not an immaterialist
character does not mean that Pale Fire does not utilize Borges‟s literary treatment of the
philosophy. I would argue that Pale Fire is not, at its core, about the specific conditions of any of
its individual characters at all. It is, I submit, an exploration of the ways in which literature
intersects with reality. This exploration has the same roots as the exploration of the reader-text
relationship in “Tlon, Uqbar”, “The Library of Babel”, “The Aleph”, and “Pierre Menard”. The
extreme extent to which Kinbote is attached to Shade sets the scene for an examination of the
reader/text relationship that seems to extend beyond the bounds of Pale Fire; it comments on the
function and meaning of literature as a whole (hence, it is a prime example of metafiction). The

Stamm 61
fact that Kinbote seems to have no steady hold on reality allows for the poem “Pale Fire” to have
a sort of agency unto itself, as if it were a character – after all, the reader cannot trust Kinbote‟s
assessment of the poem; therefore, it must necessarily speak and act for itself. The readers are as
acted-on by “Pale Fire” as Kinbote is, and they are forced into the same role as him. Because of
this, the reader is forced to question the power a text has over its reader, and vice versa. They are
also forced to examine where the distinction between reality and literature can be drawn, both as
a question asked within the text and in the fact that he or she ultimately must identify with
Kinbote as a reader of “Pale Fire”.
I would argue that for Kinbote, the “real world” is the world of the text of “Pale Fire”.
Instead of taking a legitimate critical stance with regards to the poem, he simply applies images
and phrases from it to events from his own life (events that may not have actually happened).
The way in which he stretches the poem‟s interpretive possibilities to fit the reading he desires is,
at times, almost comical in its overreaching. While the story that comprises the novel‟s third
section is indeed a compelling one, as noted before, it does not relate to “Pale Fire” in the way it
initially appears to. The story of Pale Fire is about Kinbote‟s relationship to John Shade and the
poem, a relationship that is never fully made clear. What is clear is that Kinbote has a
perspective on his own life and the life of John Shade that links the reality of both to events that
seem to have nothing to do with Shade‟s life, and might not have really happened in Kinbote‟s
life.
Pale Fire seems to take for granted the idea that reality is a subjective phenomenon, and
that readers interpret and make sense of a text in the same way that human beings understand
reality: their own mind as at the center of their engagement with reality, whether it be actual
reality or the “reality” of a text. This speaks to the concept that there is no objective truth to be

Stamm 62
found in either literature or real life. To discern whether Zembla actually exists or is merely the
delusion of a troubled mind is, I would argue, not an important goal with respect to
understanding Pale Fire. What I see as the most important issue here is, as it were, quite the
opposite: the fact that the question of the existence of Zembla, King Charles, and Shade‟s
assassin cannot ever be answered is where I locate the “true” content of Pale Fire. The ultimate
mystery that is the plot of Pale Fire mirrors the fact that the truth behind the sequence of images,
impressions, and incidents of “Pale Fire”, the poem, is unknowable.
Because it is the autobiographical work of a deceased person, the “truth” of the work,
unfinished as it is, will always be left to guesswork, expository critical theory, and inference. The
events, impressions, and personal experiences from Shade‟s life contained within the poem are,
for the most part, only suggested through the language: they are not declared as irrefutable fact.
Due to the fact that it recounts personal experiences and feelings, it is clear that those close to
Shade, such as his wife or Kinbote, would have a more informed perspective on the work.
Unfortunately, he is not present to answer questions of interpretation or meaning. For those who
believe that the meaning of a text is circumscribed by the intent of its writer, this forces “Pale
Fire” into a position in which it will be perpetually mysterious, a likely subject of debate for
generations of readers to come.
Because the author of its subject is deceased and because its commentator is either a
deeply unreliable source of “truth” in the work or entirely delusional, it seems that Pale Fire
comments on the meaninglessness of authorial intent. By extension, I would say it promulgates
the concept of the meaninglessness of looking for “truth” in a work of literature. Its main
character is obsessed with the fact that he holds the key to the “truth” of the poem. At the
beginning of the foreword, he writes: “perhaps, let me add in all modesty, he intended to ask my

Stamm 63
advice after reading his poem to me as I know he planned to do. In my notes to the poem [the
commentary] the reader will find these canceled readings…in a sense, many of them are more
valuable artistically and historically than some of the best passages in the final text.”(16) He
believes he understands the intentions of its writer in using the specific symbols and images of
the poem; this is a knowledge to which he believes he alone is privy. This character, if not
downright insane, is deeply unlikable, portrayed as self-aggrandizing, cunning, and given to
obsessive habits of thought and behavior. His compulsion to get to the root of “Pale Fire” is not
portrayed as a sincere and thoughtful inquisition so much as a greedy quest for knowledge to
which he believes he is singularly permitted access. His quest to explicate the truth of the text
that he finds so compelling is more descriptive of his character than of “Pale Fire”. Kinbote‟s
commentary, as indicated previously, offers greater insight into the life and personality of
Kinbote than it does about either John Shade‟s life or Zembla and the historical circumstances of
its beleaguered monarchy. It appears that one of the functions of the commentary is to
demonstrate the concept that works of literature cannot be said to have a “truth” outside of the
truth the reader brings to the text, i.e., the world within their mind.
This is made clear not only by the commentary, but by “Pale Fire” itself. Several sections
of the poem refer to the idea that reality is a subjective experience. While autobiographical, the
poem also contains philosophical ruminations on the nature of truth, human knowledge, and the
reality of life after death. “Pale Fire” exposes John Shade as the kind of thinker who might
ascribe to immaterialism; at various points, the work comes across as a meditation on the idea
that much of reality is inexplicable; for Shade, all of his life‟s happenings seem to have been
shrouded in an aura of mystery. This mystery seems to stem from a belief that mental processes

Stamm 64
generate their own version of reality – an immaterialist position on the workings of human
knowledge.
This hints at the way in which Kinbote understands the poem, as reflected in the
commentary. The sections of “Pale Fire” that seem to drawn on immaterialism also seem to
reflect Kinbote‟s particular understanding of himself and the world around him. This
engagement with the world is not a purely immaterialist one, because it does not seem to be
influenced by factors external to the inner life of Kinbote (at least, this is strongly suggested;
Kinbote seems to live entirely within his own mind). Immaterialism clearly states that there is a
reality external to one‟s subjective take on it. A world outside of one‟s mind exists; it is just that
no one person can know it in its entirety (the fact that Daneri from “The Aleph” was able to is
what made him a Godlike figure). This reality is created by God, who generates the reality of the
universe in its infinity, including the basis for the human experience of reality – sense
impressions.
While Kinbote himself is not a purely immaterialist figure, Kinbote‟s relationship to the
“reality” of “Pale Fire” is, however, analogous to the relationship between the human mind and
the external universe in immaterialism. This is problematized by the idea that the truth behind
“Pale Fire” is ultimately unknowable. If its writer were still alive to deny or confirm certain
readings, this would not be so; however, due to the fact that it is the unfinished autobiographical
piece of a deceased person, it can only be the source of speculation and debate. The fact that the
truth behind the events of “Pale Fire” are unknowable stands in distinction to the tenets of
immaterialism, which state that there is a truth behind the reality of the universe – this truth is
contained within, and created by, God. This creates a situation in which the reader approaches
the text like the human mind approaches the universe – both constitute their experience of the

Stamm 65
reality of their respective worlds, whether it be the real world or the world of a work of literature.
This analogy could be extended to include the idea that the author of a text would play the same
role that God plays over reality. In Pale Fire, this God is dead.
I believe the fact that John Shade is deceased confirms the notion that Pale Fire is, at its
core, about the idea that search for truth within a work of literature is meaningless. Berkeley‟s
philosophy relies on a religious explanation for the existence of reality. Pale Fire seems to say
that the reality of a novel, poem, or short story is as unknowable as God. In my estimation, this is
actually commentary on the condition of literary interpretation in general: the novel appears to
indicate that the objective understanding of a work is a pointless goal, as the “truth” of a text is
dependent upon whatever a reader – like Charles Kinbote – sees as truth. This perception is not
based on actual fact; it is based on subjective perception and understanding.
The first section of Pale Fire – the foreword to “Pale Fire”-begins with a structural
outline of the work. Kinbote discusses Shade‟s method of writing, and then offers information
about the dates of writing of each of the poem‟s four cantos. The first indication of the novel‟s
relationship to Borgesian writing techniques is found in an early mention of the fourth canto of
“Pale Fire”:
Canto Four was begun on July 19, and as already noted, the last third of its text
(lines 949-999) is supplied by a Corrected Draft. This is extremely rough in
appearance, teeming with devastating erasures and cataclysmic insertions, and
does not follow the lines of the card [it is noted that the poem was composed on
index cards] as rigidly as the Fair Copy does. Actually, it turns out to be
beautifully accurate when you once make the plunge and compel yourself to open
your eyes in the limpid depths under its confused surface. (14)

Stamm 66
This connects directly to the novel imagined by Bioy Casares and Borges in “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis
Tertius”. The narrator of Pale Fire obviously “omitted or disfigured” (to use Borges‟s words) the
facts of his poem in the corrected draft of the fourth canto; the “devastating erasures and
cataclysmic insertions” of the corrected draft would be the “various contradictions” in which the
narrator of the poem “indulged” (“Tlön, Uqbar” 3). While the reader of Pale Fire might argue
that because the corrected draft of “Pale Fire” does not count as the actual text, because it is not
the copy, I would disagree with this assessment.
This is because what readers of Pale Fire understand to be the body of “Pale Fire” is
entirely mediated through Kinbote‟s understanding of the poem. If Kinbote declares that the
corrected draft is a part of the work, the reader has no choice but to accept this, even if no part of
the corrected draft is included in the final product of “Pale Fire”. The incompleteness of “Pale
Fire” is mentioned throughout the text; the fact that it is an “unreliable” work because of the
circumstances surrounding its creation is, I would argue, the basis for the entire novel. The
“devastating erasures and cataclysmic insertions” of the fourth canto are parts of the poem, just
as it is clear that the “various indulgences” of the suggested novel of Borges and Bioy Casares in
“Tlön, Uqbar” are part of the work. If the work‟s contradictions negate the reality of certain
events and sections of the text, this negation is part of the work. In works such as “Pale Fire” and
the subject of Borges‟s and Bioy Casare‟s discussion, the concept of truth and stable reality
within a work is the subject for experimentation.
What is distinctive about “Pale Fire” is that it is left to the reader of Pale Fire to
understand that there is no underlying, objective reality of the poem. Kinbote would have the
reader believe that his interpretation of the text is the correct interpretation. Given the fact that
his interpretation relies on external events from real history (as far as he understands it), it would

Stamm 67
necessarily indicate that he wants to promulgate the idea that his reading is not just a correct
analysis, but the only possible correct analysis. This places the readers of Pale Fire in a position
in which they are forced, by the novel‟s end, to question the “truth” of the entire novel. I would
claim that this makes any reader of Pale Fire as much of an authority over the titular poem as
Kinbote. Of course, the very fact that the reader is an “authority” over the work is the subject of
Pale Fire‟s tacit commentary: it is, I believe, stating that works of literature are the subjective
product of a reader‟s imagination. The analogy between this phenomenon and the way in which
the human mind functions in immaterialism is also made clear in the short stories of Borges.
In the case of both “Pale Fire” and the suggested novel of Borges and Bioy Casares in
“Tlon, Uqbar”, the existence of facts and events in the text that contradict themselves or negate
the reality of other parts of the work is, it seems, critical to any appraisal of the work as a whole.
The negation of a text‟s reality or internal logic is what these texts are actually about. The
content of the plot, the development (or lack thereof) of its characters, the cultural context of a
work – all are secondary to the fact that these are works of literature that are about the act of
reading literature.
Towards the end of the foreword, Kinbote notes that he never shared any stories of
personal mishaps or troubled experiences of his life with John Shade. This is particularly
revealing, as the content of the commentary is founded on the story of King Charles‟s escape
from Zembla – a narrative of great misfortune and suffering. The fact that King Charles and
Kinbote might be the same person renders this early observation, if not a lie, then at least a
stretching of the truth. Even if they are not the same person per se, Kinbote‟s relationship to
King Charles is obviously an emotionally fraught one; the sharing of his story would, I believe,
count as the sharing of personal misfortune. The text reads:

Stamm 68
We never discussed, John Shade and I, any of my personal misfortunes. Our close
friendship was on a higher, exclusively intellectual level where one can rest from
emotional troubles, not share them. My admiration for him was for me a sort of
alpine cure. I experienced a grand sense of wonder whenever I looked at him,
especially in the presence of other people, inferior people. This wonder was
enhanced by my awareness of their not feeling what I felt, of their not seeing what
I saw, of their taking Shade for granted, instead of drenching every nerve, so to
speak, in the romance of his presence. (27)
This excerpt exemplifies Kinbote‟s assessment of his relationship with Shade as it permeates the
entire novel. He envisions himself as a sort of student-confidante to the older man; it is clear that
he believes himself to occupy a privileged place with regards to Shade‟s social life. References
to Shade as “my poet” punctuate his account of their time together. Here, he identifies his
admiration for Shade as singular in its intensity and as issuing from a perspective on Shade‟s
genius that is somehow more pure, accurate, and informed than the perspective of anybody else.
What is particularly significant here is the indication that his feeling of “wonder” in Shade‟s
presence is amplified by the fact that it his alone. Kinbote derives pleasure from the singularity
of his emotional reaction. This is important because it posits that whatever he values in Shade or
his poetry is not something immediately obvious; Shade does not have a larger-than-life
personality, nor is he a widely famous literary figure. It seems there would be no immediate
reasons to commit one‟s affections and attentions entirely to this man.
Given this, it makes sense that Shade is the object of Kinbote‟s obsession. A writer with a
strong group of fanatical admirers would, I believe, make it difficult for Kinbote to read himself
into Shade‟s work. That Kinbote‟s admiration for Shade is enhanced by the fact that it is

Stamm 69
unshared by others indicates that Kinbote, in some ways, identifies himself with some quality, or
qualities, of Shade‟s work that makes it wholly unique. Were others to share in the extent to
which he adores the poet, it would undermine the very thing that makes Kinbote such an ardent
fan: the fact that he is able to relate to the work on a deeply personal and individual level.
One of the qualities of Shade‟s work to which Kinbote relates so strongly is the use of
imagery and metaphors for concepts that are, at their heart, immaterialist. As noted before, the
poem refers frequently to the concept that human perception is ultimately founded in a subjective
understanding of the universe. Directly after Kinbote‟s description of his experience of spending
time with Shade, he outlines the methodology of Shade‟s writing process. This observation
seems to be plucked almost directly from A Treatise Concerning Principles Of Human
Knowledge:
He is looking from the terrace (of Prof. C.‟s house on that March evening) at the
distant lake. I am looking at him. I am witnessing a unique physiological
phenomenon: John Shade perceiving and transforming the world, taking it in and
apart, recombining its elements in the very process of storing them up so as to
produce at some unspecified date an organic miracle, a fusion of image and
music, a line of verse. (27)
It is important to note here that this excerpt begins with Kinbote watching Shade: this
immediately establishes the idea of Kinbote as a voyeur, a perceiver. His statement about John
Shade “perceiving and transforming the world” is not so much a descriptive account of how
Shade actually operates so much as the romantic fantasy of an obsessive fan. In this way, the
actions of Kinbote mirror the way in which he sees Shade as writing poetry. As Shade “perceives
and transforms the world”, “recombining its elements” to produce a work of writing, Kinbote

Stamm 70
perceives and transforms the figure of Shade to produce a person that is more a character of his
imagination than a real man. This supports the fact that Kinbote “writes” the poem “Pale Fire”
by reading himself into it. In the novel, John Shade and the poem are fundamentally linked: the
only intimations of Shade that exist outside of Kinbote‟s description of him are within the work.
Because it is an autobiographical work, and because Kinbote‟s relationship to both man and
poem is essentially the same – fanatical admiration – John Shade and “Pale Fire” are, I believe,
inextricable figures. Kinbote “creates” John Shade in the foreword just as he “creates” “Pale
Fire” in the commentary.
What is important here is not the fact that Kinbote “creates” Shade and his poem, but that
his understanding of John Shade mirrors the very way in which Shade operates with regards to
both. The actions of “perceiving and transforming the world, taking it in and taking it apart, recombining its elements in the very process of storing them up so as to produce at some
unspecified date an organic miracle” could be applied to Kinbote‟s engagement with the objects
of his fanaticism. The “organic miracle” here is contained primarily in the commentary: it is an
organic synthesis of reality and imagination. The reality of the commentary is the poem; the
imagination is demonstrated through the imaginative work that comprises the basis for its
supposed relationship to the story of Zembla, King Charles, and Gradus.
Although “Pale Fire” seems to have nothing to do with the story of Zembla that emerges
through the commentary, it is, in my assessment, connected to Kinbote because of its recurrent
imagery that is suggestive of an immaterialist understanding of human perception and worldly
knowledge. Kinbote‟s perception of the poem and its author is rooted in the way Berkeley
believed all human perception works; it seems that John Shade held a position on human
perception that similarly did not stray far from immaterialism. While “Pale Fire” portrays

Stamm 71
specific events from its author‟s life, such as the deaths of his Aunt Maud and his daughter
Hazel, the idea that the human experience of life is ultimately a subjective, internal reproduction
of a reality created by some unknowable force (such as God) is frequently insinuated through the
use of imagery that comments on the distinction between individual thought and extant truth.
The poem‟s opening line is an example of this:
I was the shadow of the waxwing slain
By the false azure in the windowpane
I was the smudge of ashen fluff – and I
Lived on, flew on, in the reflected sky. (33)
This beginning immediately establishes the theme of perception and its fallibility, a subject that
runs throughout the poem.
These verses specifically reflect the poem‟s theme of the unreliability of the senses. In
the first line, the poet identifies himself as a shadow – an object that is a secondary reproduction
of the shadow-casting object. This shadow is slain by “false azure”. Whatever renders this azure
“false” is not disclosed, but it implies that the sky‟s blueness is a product of faulty perception.
Either the speaker is mistaken in seeing the sky as azure, or the existence of the azure is
somehow unfaithful to the reality of the sky otherwise. I would argue that if the color of the sky
is “fake”, it follows that either the sky itself is fake or that the observer of the sky might be
incorrect in their observations of it. The idea that the perception of a color can be “wrong”
indicates that human sight is capable of creating an individual visual reality distinct from actual
reality.
There is, of course, no direct reference to a sky at all – it is only “false azure” in a
windowpane. I would claim that the fact that the azure can be “false” implies that the experience

Stamm 72
of viewing the sky is based on an unreal or subjective perception of the external world.
Furthermore, the fact that the false azure is framed by a window indicates that the speaker is
looking at the sky from a distance – from a point outside of it. This supports the fact that the
azure is “false”: it is false to the speaker who is viewing it through a window, or distanced
perspective. This implies that the speaker‟s perception, as an act by a body that functions
externally to whatever it being perceived, does not reflect reality faithfully so much as it
interprets it. In this line, the speaker is not inside the sky: he (assuming that the speaker is Shade,
and thus a “he”) is within a room that has a window to the outside world. This is a fitting
metaphor for the distance between the human mind and the world outside in immaterialism.
One‟s senses would be the window to the sky, and the world inside the window – the human
mind – makes sense of the outside world in a way that might actually be “false” or unreal.
In the space of two lines, the speaker changes location: in the first line, he is a shadow by
“the waxwing slain” by the “false azure in the windowpane”. If the waxwing is slain by the false
azure, it is in the sky; the shadow produced by the waxwing would, logically, not be inside a
room with a view out to the sky. The fact that the waxwing is inside the sky that slays it is also
confirmed by the fact that it is a reference to the Greek myth of Icarus. The well-known image of
Icarus, the legendary wearer of wax wings, is of him in the sky. The speaker, then, indicates that
he is first inside the sky, and then inside of another space – a room with a window. This
establishes immediately that the poet envisions himself not as an embodied human, but a
metaphysical force that can narrate his life from various points in time and space. The poet is
outside of the immediate physical and temporal location of the events in his poem, with an
almost-omniscient perspective on the details and impressions of the occurrences he outlines. This
is an important narrative voice for a work that questions the nature of the reality of the events it

Stamm 73
takes as its subjects. The fact that the poet is distanced from his world by a general sense of
unreality speaks to its immaterialist qualities. Several lines and images seem to suggest that to
understand Shade‟s life would be not to give a description of various events and circumstances
that comprise a sort of plot, but to understand the way in which he appraises and interprets these
events. It seems as if the true subject of the work is not the autobiographical details it puts to
verse, but the relationship between the events and the mind of the man who found himself a part
of them.
The power of the mind to create its own version of reality – a reality that deviates from
the truth of the external world – is exemplified by the following passage:
I was an infant when my parents died.
They both were ornithologists. I‟ve tried
So often to evoke them that today
I have a thousand parents. Sadly they
Dissolve in their own virtues and recede
But certain words, chance words I hear or read,
Such as “bad heart” always to him refer,
And “cancer of the pancreas” to her. (35)
The sentence “ I‟ve tried / So often to evoke them that today / I have a thousand parents.” is
particularly significant. These sentences, I believe, suggests that the mind has greater agency
over the experience of human reality than any factor external to the self that is essentially
separate from the external world. Shade has evoked his parents so often that he produced “a
thousand parents” – a thousand figures of thought that, this line suggests, are as “real” as actual,
living parents. Of course, these figures are real only for the moment in which he thought of them.

Stamm 74
This is demonstrated by the fact that a thousand individual instances of evoking them produced a
thousand individual parents; one moment of grasping at their existence does not suffice to place
working figures of his parents in his mind for his entire life. This is also demonstrated by the
phrase “Sadly they / dissolve in their own virtues and recede”. Arguably, the “virtues” to which
this line refers would be the ephemeral nature of thought; unlike persons, events, and objects
external to the mind, thoughts are fleeting in nature. The inconstancy of thought, then, creates a
reality that is based on a fluid sequence of perceiving, interpreting perception, and synthesizing
some personal awareness of oneself and one‟s life that changes over time.
What remains the same is the subjective character of the experience of reality. The way in
which language, reading, and writing connect to this phenomenon in Pale Fire, along with the
works of Borges, Calvino, and Acker, is exemplified by the last sentence of this excerpt:“Certain
words, chance words I hear or read / Such as „bad heart‟ always to him refer / And „cancer of the
pancreas‟ to her” is a prime example of the way in which the act of reading, as a process that
interprets language to create meaning, is treated in all of these works. Words are, in a sense,
filled with personal affects and experiences. Phrases and words that have one literal definition
take on new meaning relative to one who has had personal encounters with the actual truth for
which those words are signifiers. For Shade, the words “bad heart” refer not only to a specific
physical pathology, but to the loss of his father. This reflects the notion that words and linguistic
structures, as the elemental units of human thought and thus human reality, are not signifiers of
an unchanging and impersonal meaning. This line suggests that language is, in some sense, a
code for a reality that is interpreted individually.
Just as “bad heart” and “cancer of the pancreas” are, for Shade, terms that mean “death of
parents,” the entirety of “Pale Fire” is, for Kinbote, comprised of words that reflect his internal

Stamm 75
experience of reality – an experience that is comprised of the world of Zembla, its royals, and an
assassin set on ending the life of the mysterious King Charles. There are several instances in the
second section of Pale Fire that seem to suggest that Shade‟s assessment of reality is not very
different from Kinbote‟s. The entire novel thus becomes a meditation on the fact that there is no
objective truth to be found through an individual human experience of the world; the appearance
of objective truth or factual reality is an illusion generated by a mind that reworks its sensory and
data inputs to create a view into the outside world that is partial and that only holds meaning for
the individual who creates it. Truth and reality exist within a thinking subject‟s thoughts: this is
Berkeley‟s basic premise. The Berkeleyan implication that humans cannot understand the world
objectively seems to be a concept with which Shade is intimately familiar.
The poem reveals that in his childhood, Shade lived through an experience that catalyzed
the specific understanding of perceptive faculties and the way in which they operate that drove
many of his thoughts on the world as an adult. As a small boy, he suffered from an illness that
caused his awareness of reality to break down, as if he were hallucinating or suffering from some
other profound psychological pathology. It is suggested that this malady and its subsequent
periodical recurrences constituted a near-death experience; along with the sensation of being
“distributed through space and time” (38) his heart stops beating for “several moments” and he is
aware “that [he] had crossed / The border” (59). The first instance of this illness begins the poet‟s
fascination with the mystery of possible life after death. The concept of the afterlife is an
important theme in “Pale Fire”: the circumstances surrounding the death of his aunt and his
daughter and his own near-death experiences are outlined in detail in the work, and he notes that
he is haunted by the lack of knowledge about what transpires after death.

Stamm 76
In my reading of this poem, Shade‟s relationship to the potentiality of the afterlife is
essentially the same relationship that the “reader” figure has to the text to which she or he
commits her or his attention and that the human mind, according to Berkeley, has to extant
reality. Ultimately, the afterlife, the world of the text, and the real world are the products of the
subjective imagination of the living human. This is comprised of a thought process which, if it
suggests an actual connection to truth or reality, is only fabricating it through the synthesis of
meaning from sensory impressions. In the instances of all three worlds – text, real world, and
afterlife - the search for a truth which humans might regard as objective can never amount to
anything. The role of the author of the text here is the same as the role of God with regards to
Berkeley‟s understanding of the world and, according to most spiritual traditions, the existence
of the afterlife: God and the author are the forces that create the objective reality of the
respective worlds over which they rule, whether that be the human universe and afterlife over
which God is an authority, or the text over which the writer obviously assumes authorial control.
The reader of the text and the human being, then, are privy only to a profoundly subjective and
personal awareness of the literary work, their experience of reality, or the afterlife.
What is specifically interesting regarding this special relationship is that in Pale Fire as
well as in If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler, Don Quixote, and the selected short stories of
Borges, the narrative voice seems to wish to divest itself of agency over the textual world. In
each case, it is as if the narrator is saying that he or she understands the motions of the plot and
the text‟s meaning with no greater accuracy or insight than the reader. None of these works is
narrated by a traditional third-person voice – the voice typified by an ominiscient, God-like
perspective on the narrative and its subject. On the contrary, each of these works is narrated in
the first or second person (alternating chapters of If On A Winter’s Night address the reader

Stamm 77
directly as “you”). The owner of the narrative voice is always as acted upon in the text as he
were active, and each seems to be as surprised and intrigued by the plot motions as the text‟s
reader might be, implying that his or her knowledge of the world in which they find themselves
is as partial and potentially flawed as that of their reader‟s. This, I believe, reflects the notion that
there is no ground for objectivity or truth in these works. A reader cannot look to the narrator as
the “owner” of the text or as holding some special key to its understanding that might be
accessible via careful analysis of the way in which he or she outlines the events of the plot. The
narrator and other characters of these works are as much in the dark with regards to the “truth” of
the text as the reader.
This places the reader in a difficult position with regards to deriving meaning from the
work: he or she is as much in command of the “truth” of the narrative as the narrators or any of
the characters. Pale Fire‟s suspenseful ending reflects this: the mystery behind the relationship
between Kinbote, Gradus, King Charles and John Shade is left unsolved. It is up to the reader to
determine the reality of the circumstances surrounding Shade‟s death and Kinbote‟s
commentary. I would argue that the quest to determine this reality is the ultimate “point” of the
novel, if it can be said to have one. The reader possesses as much authority over the lives of its
characters as Nabokov had. This is reflected in the relationship Kinbote has to John Shade. In
spite of his probable insanity, the novel upholds him as exemplary of the situation of the reader
consumed by the world of a text into which he reads his own life, his personal impressions and
feelings.
The treatment of death and the afterlife in both the poem “Pale Fire” and the novel after
which it is named functions, I believe, as a metaphor for the greater issue of human knowledge
and its perpetual failure to grasp an impartial picture of the world it works to interpret. In Pale

Stamm 78
Fire, the mystery of the external world is embodied in the ultimate mystery of death; in the short
stories of Borges, this essential lack of knowledge is suggested in the treatment of the concepts
of infinity, time, and the world of the text. What is crucial here with specific regard to the genre
of metafiction is the fact that, as metafictional works, these texts offer implicit commentary on
the actual situation of the reader. The implications of metafictional works operate, ostensibly,
both within and without the world created by the text insofar as they speak directly about the
situation of literature. This engagement with the situation of literature mirrors the unavoidable
situation of all texts, which is that they are received in the act of reading; because of this, one
could say that every work of metafiction contains content which relates directly to every member
of its audience.
The fact that these specific works contain both a figure that symbolizes a reader and
commentary on the nature and circumstance of reading creates a situation in which their actual
readers are, in a sense, the subject of the text. The reader of Pale Fire, Don Quixote, If On A
Winter’s Night and the stories of Borges is like the reader figure contained within all these texts,
approaching the novel or short story of their choice with as little awareness of what they are to
find within it as the “readers” these works take as their subjects.
Because of this, these works seem to lead us to believe that the “truth” of the text cannot
be reduced to any one factor or constellation of factors from which readers might derive
“accurate” meaning. They cannot, for example, look to lessons learned by the main character
throughout their assorted pitfalls and triumphs as the “true” content of the text; they cannot read
any of these works as cultural commentary, as the cultural context of all of these narratives is, I
would argue, entirely irrelevant to the stories themselves. The works contain no ethical content
or normative messages, and they do not describe the condition of a person, place, time, or

Stamm 79
situation so much as they indicate the meaninglessness of attempts to understand a person, place,
time, or situation. These elements of Pale Fire distinguish it as a text that stands in sharp contrast
to classical literature, particularly that of the nineteenth century, which tends to locate the context
of its content as containing the truth or specific significations of a work. Pale Fire exists as a
body unto itself, without reference points that extend beyond the text into any greater cultural,
historical, or ethical framework; the reader enters into an engagement with it contingent upon
nothing but what they, individually, bring to the work.
Writer, philosopher, and critical theorist Maurice Blanchot took a similar stance with
regards to the relationship between a reader and a text. His novel Death Sentence, published in
1948, treats the subject of death and the afterlife much the same way that John Shade does in his
poem: I believe that for both Shade and the unnamed protagonist/narrator of Death Sentence, the
reality of life after death is a symbol for the ultimate truth of life, which is that there is no such
knowable truth of life. For Shade, this creates a situation in which surreal poetry is a realistic
descriptor for actual events. Attempts to understand what Pale Fire is about force a reader to
look to the poem “Pale Fire,” a work filled with abstract images that could signify a seemingly
infinite number of meanings; this is why it is easy for Kinbote to connect “Pale Fire” to his own
life. The protagonist of Death Sentence similarly treats the concept of the narrative as ghostly
and myserious, eluding rational understanding. The novel features a woman named Nathalie, and
it is suggested that she represents Blanchot‟s assessment of the origins of narrative. Blanchot
theorized that the experience and meaning of literature cannot be reduced to factors of origin or
authorial context, a perspective that flies in the face of thinkers who believed that literature
contains normative messages, ethical contents, or indeed, any statements about anything larger
than what the text contains unto itself.

Stamm 80
In his essay “The Negative Eschatology of Maurice Blanchot,” literary critic Kevin
Fitzgerald writes of Blanchot‟s opposition to the theories of Jean-Paul Sartre, who claimed that
literature should be considered on the basis of its ethical content and political character.
Fitzgerald writes:
In opposition to the Sartrean program of littérature engagée, Blanchot published
in the January 1948 issue of Bataille's Critique his important essay, "La
Littérature et le droit à la mort" (Literature and the Right to Death [WF 300-344]).
By polarizing or dichotomizing in this longish essay the space of literature and the
political action of the world, Blanchot defends poetic ambiguity against Sartre's
denunciation. Speaking of the equivocal nature of the written word, he responds
to Sartre: "the cat is not a cat, and anyone who claims that it is has nothing in
mind but this hypocritical violence: Rolet is a rascal" [WF 311]. In this manner,
rather than view the double meaning that coalesces around the written word as a
sickness the writer must combat, Blanchot implies that ambiguity alone allows the
reader to develop a sincere dialogue with the text, via interpretation. Standing
Sartre's argument on its head, he states, "deceit and mystification not only are
inevitable but constitute the writer's honesty.” (Internet source)
I believe the reader-text relationship characterized by Blanchot‟s opinion that “ambiguity alone
allows the reader to develop a sincere dialogue with the text, via interpretation” is essentially the
same as the relationship between the reader figures of Pale Fire and their texts, and the
relationship between Berkeley‟s human mind and the world it individually makes cogent.
Blanchot‟s claim that “the cat is not a cat” reflects the immaterialism that underlies all questions
of interpretation and all searches for meaning that somehow exists beneath the surface of

Stamm 81
language. Ultimately, Blanchot believes that the reader‟s mind actively supplies a literary text
with its meaning, and that the intentions of the author are ultimately irrelevant to the literary
experience. His statement that “the cat is not a cat” addresses this: the word “cat” is merely a
term to describe what a cat actually is, but that is fundamentally different to every individual.
It is apparent that both Blanchot and Berkeley would make the argument that what I
might think of as “cat” is necessarily different from what others identify as “cat”; this is because
my version of the reality of cats is mine and mine alone. I interpret “cat” to mean something
unique to my understanding of it, and in doing so, I develop a “sincere dialogue” with the
concept “cat,” just as Blanchot conceives the readers to have a sincere dialogue with the text.
Although the term “cat” is the word for speakers of English to describe and discuss what is
known as a cat, what “cat” actually signifies is different for every person – this would be the
immaterialist argument – and for literature, it means that every text is slightly different for every
different reader. In reading, the reader assumes a degree of authorial control over the work, just
as the human mind authors its own life in the act of perceiving reality.
This is precisely the relationship Kinbote has to “Pale Fire.” As both publisher and critic
of the work, it is comical that his relationship to it is skewed to a degree of subjectivity that
would render his critique, were it real, absolutely useless (if it were, say, published in literary
journals or magazines, for example). This, of course, is due to the fact that it is essentially an
immaterialist commentary on the nature of reading; Kinbote‟s engagement with the poem, while
profoundly narcissistic and absurdly self-referent, is very similar to the reader-text relationship
Blanchot imagines or the human mind about which Berkeley theorizes. Shade‟s poem is an
excellent source for deeply personal interpretations, given the surreal character of his imagery
and turns of phrase – as noted before, it is easy to imbue his poetry with any sort of personal,

Stamm 82
subjective meaning. I would argue that Nabokov wrote the second section of Pale Fire
specifically to create situations of “double meaning that coalesces around the written word”, in
Fitzgerald‟s words; instead of double or even triple or quadruple meaning, however, the
language of “Pale Fire” contains an infinite stock of interpretive potential. This allows Kinbote‟s
assessment of the work to deviate as considerably from its actual content as it does. While the
plot motions of “Pale Fire” are indisputable – occurrences such as Shade‟s daughter‟s death, his
experience of falling in love with his wife, his childhood illness – the poem‟s abstract imagery
and philosophical ruminations are, I would argue, more significant with regards to the novel Pale
Fire as a whole. If “Pale Fire” can be said to have a point, it is not to be found in the sequence of
individual events that compose John Shade‟s life, but in his approach to larger conceptual issues
surrounding the meaning of life. That the life occurrence that form the poem are merely the lens
through which the poet investigates greater questions of truth, meaning, life, and death, questions
that apply to each human life but which take on a subjective character relative to individual
experience.
The figure of John Shade and Death Sentence‟s Nathalie fill the same role for the
protagonist of their respective novels. Both are presented only through the perspective of the
individual protagonist; in both cases, they seem to be created by the imagination of their
admirers (Death Sentence‟s main character is, if not in love with, absolutely fixated on Nathalie).
Both, I believe, represent the world of the narrative – a place capable of being filled by any
reader‟s imagination. Shade, of course, is nothing but literary content; the sole window a reader
has into his life is his own autobiographical poem and its critique. Nathalie is equally elusive.
The protagonist of Death Sentence functions as the “reader” who fills her with his own meaning,

Stamm 83
creating his own image of Nathalie in the act of perceiving her. This is exemplified in a
description of an exchange between the two of them:
That was why she nearly went crazy herself: she could not face the task of making
herself known to a man who was looking at her that way – with eyes in which she
could not see herself – and saying to him: you met me at such-and-such a place.
That seemed impossible to her. But since at the same time I was behaving with a
sort of savage intimacy toward her – she was forced to believe that something had
happened which she had not noticed, and that actually she was perfectly known to
me, even if this meant that she was someone she herself did not know (42)
This is a particularly important passage to consider in light of the possibility that Nathalie
represents the world of narrative potential. The fact that she nearly goes “crazy” facing the “task
of making herself known to a man who was looking at her” “with eyes in which she could not
see herself” reflects the notion that literature is not solely self-referential, but contains content
that refers to the reader through its treatment of its subject matter. The reader finds points of selfidentification within a text from which he or she derives meaning from a work. The text itself
does not supply a reader with meaning within the hermetic seal of the novel, poem, or short
story. In this way, according to Blanchot‟s theories, texts have no meaning without a reader. The
character of Nathalie represents the text that is meaningless without its reader, Death Sentence‟s
narrator.
Here, Nathalie is faced with the responsibility of assuming agency over the meaning of
herself and her life – the duty of “making herself known.” This is a chore that is, according to
Blanchot‟s theories of writing (as narrativized in Death Sentence and demonstrated throughout a
great deal of his critical work)o, literally impossible; the narrative does not “make itself known”

Stamm 84
to a reader, but the reader makes the text known to himself or herself. The “savage intimacy”
with which the protagonist behaves toward Nathalie is, of course, the intimacy between the
reader and the text. I would argue that this intimacy is necessarily “savage” because in deriving
meaning from her, or knowing her, the protagonist ultimately destroys her. His intimacy with
Nathalie supplants the reality of her existence with his own conception of her existence. The idea
here is that he has absolute authority over her character: she is both read and created by him. She
cannot make herself known to a man with “eyes in which she cannot see herself” because if she
is not reflected in his eyes, there is nothing about her to be known. As the meaning of a text is
reliant upon the reader‟s subjective perspective on it, Nathalie‟s qualities are contingent upon her
perception. If she is not reflected in the eyes of those with whom she engages, she will not show
herself to them.
The defining quality of Nathalie thus seems to be a categorical reticence toward character
definition; she is not a fully fleshed-out human, but a fleeting glimpse into a world that evades
description. This is because she is a figure of the narrator‟s perception – she is not a person unto
herself, but an extension of him. Of their relationship, he notes: “I can say that by getting
involved with her I was hardly getting involved with anyone” (55) – she is a functional nobody,
an empty space filled in by the narrator‟s considerations of her. His authorial control over her is
analogous to the control of the reader over the text, and to the control of the human mind over
the creative synthesis and ultimate meaning of the sensory information it gathers. Nathalie
represents whatever the narrator chooses her to represent: this is why she is devoid of personality
features. She is as real as the world of Tlön, which is to say, her significance and impact on the
world of the character whose life she enters is entirely contingent on the character‟s fascination
with her. It might be noted that Nathalie is never seen without the narrator; he refers frequently

Stamm 85
to the fact that he does not want her to be without him. Her character is entirely mediated
through him, in the same way that the features of literary works are entirely mediated through a
reader.
His treatment toward her as the story progresses reflects this: he is deeply possessive of
her, alarmed by any indication that she has control over her own life. The novel ends with an
argument between the two figures: the narrator is perturbed by the discovery that Nathalie has
plans for a sculptor to make a cast of her hands and head. His request for her to forego this idea
results in a peculiar dialogue between the two of them in which the concept of Nathalie making a
plan for the future is revealed as the root of his fear. The text reads:
“Will you give up your plan or not?” She looked at me with a look which I
thought was almost willing. “Say yes,” and I took her by the hand to encourage
her. “Otherwise, I might just lock you up in this room.”. . . Of her own accord she
finally spoke: “What was that word you said?” I searched her face. My God, I
said to myself absurdly, remind me of that word. . . By chance, I heard the word
“plan.” “That‟s the word,” she said.
There are two things that appear to trouble the narrator here. The first is that she intends to have
a reproduction of her head and hands made, since in doing this, she would copy herself, a process
which with which I believe that the narrator would take issue. In copying herself, she would
make it possible for others to know her in the same way that he does. Just as Pierre Menard
creates a new text in the copying of Don Quixote, the copying of Nathalie would create a new
figure from which another potential reader might derive personal meaning. This takes away
Death Sentence‟s narrator‟s full authorship of Nathalie. A large part of the pleasure he derives in
effectively owning her is the pleasure that Kinbote takes in assuming that he has a special place

Stamm 86
with regards to the life of John Shade: for both Kinbote and Death Sentence‟s protagonist, the
fact that they are the only functional “author” over their subjects is a necessary element in their
relationship. Kinbote notes that without his commentary, Shade‟s poem “simply has not human
reality at all since the human reality of such a poem as his…has to depend entirely on the reality
of its author and his surroundings, attachments and so forth, a reality than only my notes can
provide” (29). Similarly, the narrator of Death Sentence provides the only human reality that
inheres to the character of Nathalie.
The other issue that troubles the narrator here is the fact that Nathalie has made a plan.
The problem with planning, specifically, is that it assumes that she has control over her own
future – her own narrative. In taking hold of the direction of her own future, she divests the
narrator of his ability to effectively “write” her. Once the narrator identifies Nathalie‟s decision
to get a cast of her head and hands made as a “plan”, it ceases to be a plan. After the narrator
makes clear that he wishes for her to give up the idea, Nathalie says, “It isn‟t a plan any longer”
(77). What is critical here is that she does not say “Yes, I will give it up” or “I won‟t do it,” but
that she notes that her decision is no longer a plan – whatever it is now, his identification of it as
a “plan,” or a choice she made for herself in the future, negates its meaning as such. He is the
ultimate writer of her life, and she has no future that goes unauthorized by him.
Nathalie, by certain factors of her personality (or functional lack thereof), is as inert and
meaningless as a text without its reader. Nabokov allows for Kinbote to have incontestable
ownership over the character of Shade because Shade, as the subjective textual figure, is a dead
man – he has no present voice or possible future. Whereas Nathalie could speak back to her
author (thought in a limited way), Shade remains trapped in the dual world of the poetry of “Pale
Fire” and the poetic imagination of a raving fanatic. The question of the “real” John Shade is

Stamm 87
then thrust into the foreground of a reader‟s attention: how does a reader make sense of the
character of Shade when all that is shown of him is in “Pale Fire” and Kinbote‟s assessment of
it? I would claim that the character of Shade is elucidated by his relationship to the world around
him: as a figure with certain personality attributes and qualities, he might be unknowable, but the
role he plays in the text is that of an ultimately immaterialist thinker.
As noted before, the relationship between Shade and Kinbote and the relationship
between the nameless protagonist of Death Sentence and Nathalie function in the same way as
Shade‟s relationship to the reality of his life. After his cataclysmic childhood illness, Shade‟s
assessment of the ways in which perception (and the knowledge of reality it subsequently
produces) works are forever altered to reflect a position on the nature of reality that is essentially
immaterialist. This is best exemplified by the ultimate mystery of death, a mystery that taunts
Shade from a very early age. At the beginning of the second canto of “Pale Fire,” Shade writes
There was a time in my demented youth
When somehow I suspected that the truth
About survival after death was known
To every human being: I alone
Knew nothing, and a great conspiracy
Of books and people hid the truth from me (Pale Fire 39)
The lines “a great conspiracy / Of books and people hid the truth from me” note that for the
young Shade, the world of literature and the world of other people contain the truth of the most
profound mystery. Shade reflects on this period of time as “demented,” indicating that he has
since reconsidered this suspicion. It seems that later in life, he comes to the awareness that no
book or person contains the secrets of life after death. Furthermore, it seems that he comes to

Stamm 88
realize that books, people, and events contain no secrets or factors of their life or substance that
are essentially codes to be broken or content to be interpreted as signifying some objectively true
meaning. It is, however, significant that Shade chooses to include this reflection on his youth in
the poem. Although he later disabuses himself of the notion that he alone does not understand
what happens after death, the mystery of the afterlife continues to grip him. He is perpetually
caught in the tension between feeling compelled to understand the secrets of the grave and
knowing that he cannot.
The theme of tension between attempts to understand the external world and the
inevitability of the fact that he cannot continues throughout the poem. The poet evidently holds a
strong belief in the metaphysical and seems to constantly be grasping for the right words to
explain exactly what he is experiencing. The fact that he cannot do this seems to frustrate him
not only on the basis of the fact that he cannot communicate his reality to the external world, but
that he cannot communicate it to himself. It is as if language‟s limitations in creating a whole
picture of reality inside his mind are the forces which compel him to write with the urgency,
regularity, and careful methodology that he does. He is conjuring an unknowable force through
his words, but what is implicit throughout the poem is the idea that his poetry suggests
something it can never literally reproduce. This is particularly important in light of the fact that
Kinbote supplants this unknowable something with a story of his own; the reader of Pale Fire is
thrown off by the idea that the metaphysical points of “Pale Fire” are actually references to
something that transpired in the real world. However, this is obviously not the case, and is made
further complicated by the idea that the real-world events of which Kinbote writes – such as the
youthful interests of the deposed King Charles, or the variety of unusual circumstances his
escape from Zembla found him in – probably did not happen at all.

Stamm 89
Shade‟s aggravation with language as a means to concretize the metaphysical is
exemplified in a passage from “Pale Fire” in which he bemoans the fact that human beings can
only begin to reveal, through language and thinking, the vast plains that the afterlife might hold
in store for them. The passage reads:
It isn‟t that we dream too wild a dream:
The trouble is we do not make it seem
Sufficiently unlikely; for the most
We can think up is a domestic ghost.
How difficult these efforts to translate
Into one‟s tongue a public fate!
Instead of poetry divinely terse,
Disjointed notes, Insomnia‟s mean verse!
Life is a message scribbled in the dark. (41)
The most significant part of this excerpt are the lines “It isn‟t that we dream too wild a dream /
The trouble is we do not make it seem / sufficiently unlikely.” This connects directly to
Blanchot‟s argument, as quoted in Fitzgerald‟s piece, that “deceit and mystification constitute the
writer‟s honesty”. Shade, it seems, implies here that a mimetic representation of the world inside
the mind is a meaningless goal. The world of the afterlife, as the space in which the descriptive
and creative powers of the human imagination should be given the greatest degree of freedom to
create something entirely new, must not be inhabited by “domestic ghosts” but by something that
resembles nothing in human reality. I believe that Shade would extend this argument to include
the idea that human reality is unknowable: he uses the realms of life after death to make a case
for creating and communicating dreams that are fantastical, unlikely, and which have no seeming

Stamm 90
relationship to the real world because it is a logical place to argue for the powers of the mind in
creating the existence of a place.
Life on Earth is, in fact, as mysterious to Shade as life after death. Death is an event in
which something becomes definitively and irrevocably unknowable: nobody can make the
argument that there is a concrete, stable reality of death as they might for the notion that there is
a concrete, stable reality of life, an objective truth to which all human beings have access.
Shade‟s poem exposes a tendency in its author toward an immaterialist understanding not only of
death, which is an essentially immaterialist concept, insofar as humans have to individually
invent what it means, but of the real, living universe. A few stanzas prior to the excerpt listed
above, he writes, “Space is a swarming in the eyes; and time, a singing in the ears” (40), locating
the reality of time and space inside the individual. The line “life is a message scribbled in the
dark” suggests this: it seems to say that life is an act of writing, or creating, but furthermore, it is
creation without illumination of the space around it. What might be suggested here is the idea
that ultimately, one synthesizes one‟s own reality without being sure of anything beyond one‟s
own mind; it really is writing in the dark, toward a mysterious end.
The analogy between writing and the internal, subjective creation of one‟s reality
continues throughout the poem. In the Third Canto, the poet seeks out a woman who has had
near-death encounters as a means to gain insight into his own experiences with the edges of life
and death. Her story was printed in a magazine; he contacts her so that they can meet and
exchange stories of their respective deathly incidences. He is captivated by the fact that they both
seem to have seen a white fountain in the great beyond; however, he soon realizes that the “white
fountain” of which he read in her article was actually a misprint – what she actually saw was a

Stamm 91
white mountain. This completely throws off his conception of their connection and the fact that
she might confirm the existence of life after death. The text reads:
There‟s one misprint – not that it matters much:
Mountain, not fountain. The majestic touch.
Life everlasting – based on a misprint!
I mused as I drove homeward: take the hint,
And stop investigating the abyss?
But all at once it dawned on me that this
Was the real point, the contrapuntal theme,
Just this: not text, not texture, not the dream
But topsy-turvical coincidence,
Not flimsy nonsense, but a web of sense. (62-63)
The first issue worth noting here is the phrase “life everlasting – based on a misprint!”. Shade
clearly pitches a great deal of his faith in the written word. For him, the existence of life after
death is as good as confirmed by the written word of another. It seems that he was ready to begin
believing in the afterlife based solely on the contents of one article in a magazine. This indicates
that he trusts the written word more than his own appraisal of the philosophical circumstance of
life after death, experiences with the death of others, or his personal near-death experiences. The
greater issue here is the relationship between the written word and the reader: before learning
that “white fountain” was a misprint, Shade was primed to fill it with his own meaning;
afterwards, he is ready to abandon his inquisition into the reality of the great beyond entirely.
True to immaterialist form, he ultimately chooses to imbue the event with his own meaning: he

Stamm 92
decides that the coincidence of the misprint is part of some larger pattern that indicates that his
quest to uncover death‟s reality is not in vain.
The fact that Shade fills the incident of the misprint with his own meaning, essentially
transforming its role, mirrors the fact that Kinbote essentially creates the character of John
Shade. What makes this sequence of mirroring even more complex is the fact that, I would
argue, the reader cannot help but be drawn into the same role. There are points within the text of
Pale Fire which seem as though Nabokov is directly addressing the reader – offering up
information that assumed profound meaning in the context that the work recognizes itself as a
book. There are instances in “Pale Fire” which allude to the existence of a commentary. These
sections seem to be so prescient with regards to the existence of the commentary that follows
them that it is as if the authorial voice is immediately directed toward the reader, an occurrence
which throws the work into an entirely new light – all of a sudden, it is as if the reader is a
character. An example of such an instance is as follows:
And while the safety blade with scrape and screak
Travels across the country of my cheek,
Cars on the highway pass, and up the steep
Incline big trucks around my jawbone creep,
And now a silent liner docks, and now
Sunglessers tour Beirut, and now I plough
Old Zembla‟s fields where my gray stubble grows,
And slaves make hay between my mouth and nose.
Man’s life as commentary to abstruse
Unfinished poem. Note for further use. (67)

Stamm 93
It is significant that this passage opens up with a relatively mundane description of Shade
shaving his face. Compared to certain flights of linguistic fancy in the work, this excerpt is not
particularly distinctive. The fact that it is a fairly boring description of a fairly unremarkable act
functions, however, to emphasize the last two lines. It is as if the poet is caught in thought, and
then there is a sudden break – as if “man‟s life as commentary to unfinished poem” is an
immediate revelation, and the attention is suddenly not on him or the events of his life, but
something far more profound entirely. This would be the commentary on “Pale Fire,” something
of which he is obviously unaware. However, as I have mentioned, the third part of Pale Fire is a
red herring for the mysterious content of “Pale Fire.” The allusions to underlying stories, ideas or
impressions that are never made clear within the poem do not actually resolve themselves in
Kinbote‟s commentary. What is important, however, is not that they do or do not solve the
mysteries of “Pale Fire,” but the fact that to the reader, it seems that they do. The notion of
“seemingness” having the same function as “being” is a large part of what Pale Fire is about. At
first, it seems as if the lines “Man‟s life as commentary to abstruse unfinished poem” must
necessarily have some connection to the third part of the novel. The fact that it does not is
mystifying, but it is in this sort of mystification that the novel finds its true footing. It is true that
the entirety of Kinbote‟s life, as far as a reader can be aware, is indeed commentary to an
abstruse unfinished poem. However, this does not mean that Shade used Kinbote‟s life as fodder
for the content of his work. Nor does it mean that he necessarily didn‟t, although this seems to
certainly be the case. The function of the line “man‟s life as commentary to abstruse unfinished
poem” does not, I believe, shed light on the actual workings of Pale Fire itself. Instead, it puts
readers in a situation where, like Kinbote and “Pale Fire,” they believe they see clues and

Stamm 94
connections in the work that reveal its “true” meaning. This line, however, only serves to
compound the greater air of unknowability that surrounds Pale Fire.
The notion of man‟s life as commentary to an abstruse unfinished poem can also be read
in a larger immaterialist light. In the short stories of Borges along with Pale Fire, If On A
Winter’s Night A Traveler, and Don Quixote, there is the figure of a reader and a text; the lives of
each of the readers could conceivably be considered commentary on the text insofar as they offer
insight into the way the text functions for the individual reader. While each of these texts are not
literally an “abstruse unfinished poem”, they are unfinished in the sense that their meaning and
interpretation remains open – the fact that they retain an air of mystery and inexplicability is the
foundation for each of the stories that take the relationship between their “reader” figures and
these texts are their subject.
The commentary section – Part Three – of Pale Fire makes evident the extent to which
Kinbote desires a stable and unchangeable meaning behind “Pale Fire,” an origin of the poem
that places him and the stories he recounted to Shade as its source material. It seems that Kinbote
can derive meaning from the work only if he believes himself to have literal authorial control of
the work in the sense that without him, the work could not exist. He seems to be incapable of
supplying “Pale Fire” with meaning if it does not have actual relevance to his life. An example of
this is seen in a section of the commentary in which Kinbote bemoans the deletion of a certain
passage of the original version of “Pale Fire” from the publish version. The text reads:
As children playing in a castle find
In some old closet full of toys, behind
The animals and masks a sliding door
[four words heavily crossed out] a secret corridor –

Stamm 95
…I cannot say how sorry I am the he rejected these lines. I regret it not only because of
their intrinsic beauty, which is great, but also because the imagery they contain was
suggested by something Shade had from me. (118)
There are a number of instances in the above excerpt that reflect the idea that Kinbote can only
contend with the work if he locates himself as the absolute root of its mysteries. What is
particularly interesting here is the fact that the reader must also question his or her relation to the
work in light of the fact that they are, in an important sense, a functional Kinbote. The line “the
animals and masks, a sliding door [four words heavily crossed out] a secret corridor” is
tantalizing: the four words heavily crossed out seem significant on the basis of the fact that they
are crossed out. The fact that there is erased text leads both the reader and Kinbote to believe that
there is some fundamental truth that is missing – and that through careful analysis or explication,
they might be able to conjure what those words were, thus illuminating that section of the poem.
The very fact that Shade chose to edit part of his original thought process out is what is
tantalizing here: the reader wants to know not only what it is that leads to the image of a secret
corridor, but why Shade saw it fit to remove that from the final draft, as if it contains some
profound horror or truth that would entirely change the meaning of the poem.
This drive to understand a work for its intrinsic and original meaning is what fuels
Kinbote; I believe that Pale Fire is an examination of this drive, and that Kinbote is a figure that
hyperbolizes the tendency of readers to explicate a text in a way that indicates that there is
intrinsic meaning within a work, meaning that is deeper than the surface of the language.
Kinbote‟s method of doing this ends with him identifying himself as the source for the text that
obsesses him. In doing so, he makes a fool of himself to the readers of Pale Fire. Insofar as Pale
Fire offers commentary on the way literature actually functions for a reader, and the interpretive

Stamm 96
control the reader has over literature, it seems that he is actually a symbol for the readers to
whom he appears to be a ridicule-worthy character. In seeking meaning, he reveals his own
flaws; his search for meaning signifies the content of his mind rather than the content of the
work. In doing this, it is as if Nabokov is saying that meaning does not inhere to the written word
or to the reader‟s journey to uncover meaning in the word, but in a subjective and necessary
partial understanding of literature that is based in the reader‟s mind as a window through which
all content is filtered. What Kinbote lacks is the awareness that one‟s take on a text is one‟s own
and cannot be extended to have meaning for other people: in writing a commentary to be
published, Kinbote implies the larger statement that his interpretation is the single correct one.
This is obviously not the case; by extension, I believe that any single understanding of Pale Fire
does not suffice to elucidate the work on sheer basis of the fact that the work itself indicates the
meaninglessness of singular interpretation or any attempt to understand the objective meaning or
message of a work of literature. Just as Berkeley theorizes that one synthesizes a subjective
version of reality in the gathering of objective sensory information, Pale Fire indicates that one
synthesizes a subjective experience with a text based on his or her interaction with its objective
content.
As we have seen, the notion of seeking an origin to a text so as to uncover a correct
interpretation or meaning of it is revealed as fundamentally pointless in Pale Fire. Death
Sentence similarly toys with the problems of the origins of narrative as a source for literary
analysis and understanding – Nathalie, as a symbol for narrative, is mysterious, evading
description and agency over the world that surrounds her. She is only an extension of her reader,
as “Pale Fire” and the figure of John Shade are only an extension of Kinbote‟s imagining, and,
for Berkeley, the real world is merely a play of images synthesized within the mind of the

Stamm 97
individual. These images, in turn, are rooted in sense impressions with as many potential
interpretations as there are human beings. In all cases, the author of a world – whether it be the
world of a text or the “real” world whose author is God – is revealed as a sort of illusory
character, a figure whose existence is understood only in subjective terms. Ultimately, for the
individual, this author only serves as the embodiment of one‟s particular experience of reality.
The relationship between the reader and the text, or the human mind and the world, is a fiction
that is active in the creation of the appearance of meaning outside of one‟s mind – but it is a
fiction, or an invented creation. The meaning that appears to be beyond one‟s mind is artificially
synthesized and cannot be rationally deduced to an objective origin, such as an author‟s
intention, the ethical function of a work, or the uncovering of some key plot element, as would
be the case with a typical murder mystery, for example.
Critical theorist and philosopher Roland Barthes took the stance that Pale Fire and Death
Sentence seem to take with regards to the concept of narrative origin and authorship: in his essay
“Death of the Author”, he writes of the sway that the image of the author, as the root for
understanding and interpreting a work, holds over readers and critics alike. He argues that the
concept of the author is merely a fiction that has had a long hold on the traditional approach to
reading:
The image of literature to be found in ordinary culture is tyrannically centered on
the author, his person, his life, his tastes, his passions, while criticism still consists
for the most part in saying that Baudelaire‟s work is the failure of Baudelaire the
man, Van Gogh‟s his madness, Tchaikovsky‟s his vice. The explanation of a
work is always sought in the man or woman who produced it, as if it were always
in the end, through the more or less transparent allegory of the fiction, the voice

Stamm 98
of a single person, the author confiding in us. Though the sway of the Author
remains powerful (the new criticism has often done no more than consolidate it),
it goes without saying that certain writers have long since attempted to loosen it.
In France, Mallarme was doubtless the first to see and to foresee in its full extent
the necessity to substitute language itself for the person who until then had
supposed to be its owner. For him, for us too, it is language which speaks, not the
author; to write is, through a prerequisite impersonality (not at all to be confused
with the castrating objectivity of the realist novelist), to reach that point where
only language acts, „performs‟, and not „me‟. (1322)
This claim is highly important with relation to Borges, Nabokov, Calvino, and Acker. Borges
masterfully sidestepped the problem of critics looking to him and his authorial intent as the
source for understanding his works. He did accomplished this by fictionalizing himself in his
texts, more often than not as a reader figure who seems just as baffled by the problems of
literature as his fellow fictional characters and his actual readers. Beyond that, Borges‟s personal
essays reflect his self-understanding not as a literary figure, but as a devoted reader who sought
to understand fiction in writing fiction – one whose primary intellectual allegiances were to the
art of reading, not writing. The very content of his fictional work seems to absolve him of the
responsibility of explaining it or offering insight into it; because much of it comments on the
situation of the reader, the reader of Borges is compelled to look to the work or to herself in
order to gain insight into the work – not to Borges as a figure that stands outside of the work.
The Borges a reader understands is based on her own experiences as a reader of all literature;
ultimately, he is a personal invention of every individual reader. For this reason, his selffictionalization seems to make perfect sense.

Stamm 99
Nabokov similarly avoids the problem of being seen as the source for understanding his
works – at least Pale Fire. He accomplishes this in a different way, however. As Pale Fire offers
commentary on the situation of the reader, and furnishes readers with a reader figure whose
analytical approach is absolutely not to be followed, it implicitly questions the traditional
approach to literature against which Barthes writes. Pale Fire is a radical argument against these
traditional readings: Kinbote‟s interpretation of “Pale Fire” effectively destroys the author in the
process of attempting to understand his motivations. John Shade becomes nothing but a “shade”
– a ghost, a phantom – of Kinbote‟s fantasies about him; with regards to his reception by the
reader of Pale Fire, he is stripped of any agency over the text that is supposed to be his.
Pale Fire is constructed so that this reflects Shade‟s approach to his own life, as
exemplified by certain passages from the poem. He makes no claims to understanding events that
happen to him or his own interests; he merely conveys his experience of reality through poetry.
To grasp both “Pale Fire” and Pale Fire is to assume the stance that Shade takes and that
Kinbote fails to take: there is no objective or singular reality, either in the literary world or the
real world, and to speak of the meaning of life, the existence of the afterlife, or the truth of a
literary work is merely to speculate or suppose.
This is supported by what I believe is a highly revealing section of the commentary:
during lengthy explanation of a short line from the poem, Kinbote recounts part of a conversation
he had with Shade. Shade is discussing his personal opinions of the way literature is taught and
assessed, and notes “when I hear a critic speaking of an author‟s sincerity I know that either the
critic or the author is a fool” (156). This is in line with the way Shade seems to approach both his
life and his art: sincerity is never a principle that comes into play, because to be sincere is to
assume that there is something to be sincere about – some element of oneself or one‟s life that

Stamm 100
might be understood as more true than any false performance of the self or mystification of the
real. In contradistinction to this, Shade seems to suppose that the true content of both a life and a
work of literature is to be found in its mystification and “performance”; the appearance of the
real, for Shade, is as good as the real. This is a fundamentally immaterialist stance insofar as it
makes the claim that the perception of a thing is the same as the thing itself; the performance of a
work of literature and its individual interpretation is the same thing as the work itself – there is
no reality beneath it.
The imagined narrative of Bioy Casares and the fictional Borges at the beginning of
“Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius” promises “an atrocious or banal reality” to the most careful and
dedicated readers. It seems that Nabokov designed Pale Fire to indicate the existence of this
atrocious or banal reality; the complex narrative and highly innovative structure of the work
suggests that a committed reader will, through careful analysis and reflection, come to some
ultimate conclusion regarding the truth of who Charles Kinbote really is and the extent to which
his commentary on “Pale Fire” reflects anything actual about the poem. Pale Fire is underscored
by the promise of a reality that exists beneath the immediate and obvious plot content. This,
however, is not the case – and the fact that it is not the case is, I would argue, part of its larger
commentary on the situation of reading in general. The angle on literature that Nabokov takes in
Pale Fire is perhaps best summed up by what seems to be a minor digression in the commentary.
Kinbote is discussing the work of a Zemblan artist; in outlining the artists methods, he discloses
an approach to the invention of a false reality that I believe is critical to consider with regards to
analyzing Borges, Calvino, and Acker:
But in some of those portraits Eystein had also resorted to a weird form of
trickery: among his decorations of wood or wool, gold or velvet, he would insert

Stamm 101
one which was really made of the material elsewhere imitated by paint. This
device was apparently meant to enhance the effect of his tactile and tonal values
had, however, something ignoble about it and disclosed not only an essential flaw
in Eystein‟s talent, but the basic fact that “reality” is neither the subject nor the
object of true art which creates its own special reality having nothing to do with
the “reality” perceived by the communal eye. (130)
Kinbote‟s definition of “true art” is revelatory of the way in which the entirety of Pale Fire
functions. The world of Pale Fire does not have to contain the underlying truth it seems to
indicate it has – while the communal eye of the readers of Pale Fire might see a certain truth or
reality hiding beneath the text, or within certain patterns that emerge over the course of the
novel, it is ultimately nothing but an absolute mystification of itself. Kinbote remains a
fundamentally mysterious character. Arguably, his entire life narrative, as outlined in the
commentary, is his true art that “creates its own special reality having nothing to do with the
„reality‟ perceived by the communal eye.” Certainly the commentary‟s end suggests this:
Kinbote fancifully imagines possible futures for himself, futures in which he assumes new
identities and lives in the perpetual evasion of Gradus:
Oh, I may do many things! History permitting, I may sail back to my recovered
kingdom, and with a great sob greet the gray coastline and the gleam of a roof in
the rain…but whatever happens, wherever the scene is laid, somebody,
somewhere, will quietly set out…a bigger, more respectable, more competent
Gradus (301).
The end of the novel retains the aura of mystery with which the entirety of Pale Fire is imbued.
This is not unlike the endings of the short stories of Borges: ultimately, the reader is left in a state

Stamm 102
of speculation and wonderment. These texts offer windows into the complex relationships
between readers and texts, providing multiple avenues of thought and commentary on the
subject. These texts declare that the world of literature is based in not in its content as established
by the author, but its reception and interpretation: the experience of literature becomes a twoway street in which the reader‟s understanding of a work is as critical to its meaning as a writer‟s
intention in writing it, in the same way that what the human mind knows to be real cannot
surpass the limitations imposed on it by its own necessarily subjective character.
I would extend this argument by making the statement that these works, in their
appropriation of the Borgesian immaterialist approach to literature, present the reader with a
situation in which interpretation of literature becomes meaningless. Any reading is the correct
reading; because of this, the search for meaning within a text that relies on factors external to the
work itself (i.e., authorial intent, cultural or historical context, ethical concerns) will be
fundamentally fruitless. Thus Borges‟s adoption of immaterialism as a theoretical background
for literature problematizes the possibility of shared readings that makes claims to correctness or
objectivity and explication of the texts that refer to anything beyond the texts themselves.
This phenomenon is taken to an extreme in Italo Calvino‟s novel If On A Winter’s Night
A Traveler. Whereas the short stories of Borges and Pale Fire present their readers with a reader
figure internal to the text, Winter’s Night turns its actual reader into a character by addressing
him or her directly and narrating his or her actions throughout the course of the novel. This
creates a work that is so deeply self-reflexive that there seems to be no route to its interpretation
or analysis beyond one‟s immediate engagement with it. Whereas Pale Fire and Borges‟s short
stories play with the idea that there is a secret world or hidden truth (or truths) within their
narratives, Calvino‟s novel completely dissolves the boundary between reader and text, forcing

Stamm 103
the reader into a radically subjective position in which they are as active over the text as
Calvino‟s narrator. If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler is the next step in a lineage that imagines
reading as an absolutely immaterialist phenomenon, an act that creates worlds that exist solely
within the reader‟s mind.

Stamm 104
Part Three: Traces of Borges in Italo Calvino’s If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler
and Kathy Acker’s Don Quixote (Which Was A Dream)
Italo Calvino‟s 1979 novel If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler is one of the most
structurally innovative and complex novels of the twentieth century. It tells the story of a
reader‟s attempts to read a book titled “If On A Winter‟s Night A Traveler,” a task that proves
nearly impossible due to publishing errors made within the text. The novel opens by addressing
the reader in the second person, as “you,” and describes the process of this reader in preparing to
embark on his or her journey into the book; this begins a pattern in which every other chapter is
narrated directly to the reader, outlining his or her actions or thoughts with regards to the chapter
directly preceding it. These other chapters consist of the first chapters of a plethora of different
novels, each from a different writer and cultural background. Throughout the course of the
narrative, the narrator comments frequently and in depth about the situation of reading and the
various ways in which the act of reading can be conceived and approached. The main character‟s
frustration with the texts he comes across in his quest for a satisfactory reading of “If On A
Winter‟s Night A Traveler” evolves into an extended meditation on the nature of reading by the
narrator, who, in directly confronting the reader‟s engagement with the text, makes great
statements about the power that reading has over a reader and the way in which a reader‟s mind
affects the world of the text.
What is specifically significant with regards to Winter’s Night‟s relationship the short
stories of Borges and Pale Fire is the narrator‟s use of the second-person voice. Borges‟s
narratives and Nabokov‟s novel contain reader figures with which their actual reader, arguably,
identifies – in both instances, the reader figures are presented with texts that open up expansive
philosophical problems and which, for one reason or another, capture the attention of the reader

Stamm 105
who seeks some sort of profound meaning or understanding of the work as it relates to their own
life. Given the complex, surrealistic, and challenging nature of the works themselves, the reader
figures contained within each of them might be read as symbolic of the situation of the actual
reader of Borges or Nabokov. This is the framework in which the commentary on reading within
each of these texts unfurls: the fact that these are all narratives about reading creates an ironic
scenario in which the underlying understanding is, of course, that all these texts are themselves
being read by a figure outside of the narrative – the actual reader. This is never mentioned
directly inside the work, of course; the barrier between reader-figure and reader is always
maintained.
This wall is entirely destroyed in Winter’s Night, largely due to the use of the second
person voice. It is startling to read the first line of the novel, which is “You are about begin
reading Italo Calvino‟s new novel, If on a winter’s night traveler” (3). This line creates the
illusion that the actual reader – not the reader figure – is the subject of the narrator‟s voice. The
“you” to which the narrator refers is, of course, a character distinct from the reader, but this
distinction becomes very complicated as the entirety of this main character‟s identity and actions
within the novel revolve around his (it is implied that this figure is male) attempts to read a text
with the same title of the actual novel. Throughout the course of the narrative, the reader‟s
understanding of what it means to read evolves alongside the narrator‟s lengthy musings on the
various approaches one might take to literature and, perhaps most significantly, the subjectobject relationship of a text – the subject – and the reader‟s mind, the object. Ultimately, the
novel might be conceived of as an argument for an approach to literature that locates the entirety
of the experience of a novel inside the reader‟s mind, calling for an approach to the world of a
text that sees it as fully subject to a reader‟s mind. This is in line with the Borgesian approach to

Stamm 106
reading, as exemplified by the individual stories of so many of his characters as they struggle to
contend with a text (or body of texts, as in “The Library of Babel”). This is also the exact
circumstance of Kinbote as he dissects “Pale Fire”: it is, ultimately, revealed that the meaning
the work holds for him is rooted entirely in himself, as opposed to the work of its author or
other‟s opinions of it.
Borges‟s literary reworking of George Berkeley‟s immaterialist version of the philosophy
of idealism found multiple iterations in his stories and in Pale Fire. It seems to be stretched to its
ultimate conclusion in Winter’s Night, the narrator of which calls for a re-conception of reading
that champions the mind of the reader as being entirely active in creating the world of a text. The
novel questions the nature of objectivity and the idea that a novel does not exist without readers
to draw their own conclusions from it; it is shown, at various points in the plot, that there is no
single correct way to read or discuss any text. The magic of literature, at least as it is posited in
this novel, is proposed as existing in the fact that each work of fiction creates as many texts as
there are readers.
The concept of the world of a text which is entirely dependent on subjective impressions
and personal re-fashioning of its specific elements and features is symbolized in If On A Winter’s
Night A Traveler in the character of Ludmilla – a woman who, like the main character, is
attempting to read “If On A Winter‟s Night A Traveler” and who joins the protagonist on his
quest to uncover the mystery of the literary mix-up so that she too might garner a satisfactory
reading and understanding of the work. Ludmilla functions for the main character in the same
way that the novel does: he does not understand her, is obsessed by the thought of knowing her,
and seeks to form a sort of union of readers with her (with an clear ulterior motive that is
blatantly Eros-driven). This union could be thought of as a holistic engagement with the literary

Stamm 107
work. Ludmilla, I believe, represents the world of the text, which plays the role of subject to the
reader‟s mind, which is the object, or stable ground for meaning-derivation and textual
interpretation. In inserting a sought-after “other” into the work, Calvino envisions the
relationship between a reader and a text as a romantic relationship. In this relationship the main
character is compelled by the thought of the mysterious “other” whom he seeks to
psychologically inhabit, but whom, it is suggested, is merely a flight of fantasy within his mind.
Lengthy passages are devoted to the main character‟s imaginings of her and who she might be, if
only he were to get to know her better. They become progressively closer as the narrative
unfurls; their search to uncover the truth of the book that compels them leads them both on
strange adventures together. The novel‟s end sees the protagonist deciding to marry Ludmilla,
which, I would argue, is a metaphor for the ultimate union of reader and text, object and subject,
mind and extant reality. Subject and object become one, and the search to make “sense” of the
subject is understood to be an extension of the object, which includes the quest for the subject as
a part of itself.
This ending suggests that, ultimately, the novel and the reader are one and the same, that
a reader must look to him or herself to begin to understand or have an honest experience with a
work. There is no external “other” in either a text or another person; what is thought of as being
external to one‟s experience is really the subjective impression of the “other” that is entirely
contingent to one‟s individual approach to an “other” figure, whether it be a text or a person. The
reality of this figure is merely a play of words, impressions, and images inside the mind. The
ending, however, is far from the only instance in which the Borgesian-immaterialist approach to
reading is concretized in a scene or event from the plot.

Stamm 108
Winter’s Night contains a great numbers of scenes which function as virtual
manifestations of the notion that reading is an immaterialist phenomenon. Each character in the
novel seems to come to this conclusion on their own, through some series of unusual events or
personal musings. The first glimpse of the novel‟s heavy immaterialist leanings is seen toward
the end of the first chapter. The reader – the “you” of the book – has just purchased the novel,
and the narrator is commenting on the fact that the book‟s covers seem to reveal very little about
the book itself and that the tone of the authorial voice does not match with his remembrance of
the author. This lays the groundwork for the fundamental mystery that is If On A Winter’s Night
A Traveler. The text reads:
You turn the book over in your hands, you scan the sentences on the back of the
jacket, generic phrases that don‟t say a great deal. So much the better, there is no
message that indiscreetly outshouts the message that the book itself must
communicate directly, that you must extract from the book, however much or
little it may be . . . So here you are now, ready to attack the first lines of the first
page. You prepare to recognize the unmistakable tone of the author. No. You
don‟t recognize it at all. But now that you think about it, who ever said this author
had an unmistakable tone? On the contrary, he is known as an author who
changes greatly from one book to the next. And in these very changes you
recognize him as himself. (9)
The fact that the exterior of the book does not indicate any connection between itself and books
with which the reader is already familiar is important: it allows for an experience of the text that
has no precedent. Because of this, the reader cannot default to prior analyses or past experiences
to make sense of the novel; nor can he look to the author as a source against which to compare

Stamm 109
this novel in the hopes of a deeper understanding of it than what his immediate impression of the
text might offer. No – the reader must sally forth on his or her own, without any sort of guidance
based on memory of other texts or expectations based on some awareness of authorial
consistency. The only thing that the reader can expect is to be caught up in something entirely
new to him, something for which he cannot prepare himself.
The reader‟s mind, then, is a sort of tabula rasa with regards to the world he is about to
enter. This blank slate allows for an experience with the work unclouded by impressions that, in
reality, would have nothing to do with the immediate work at hand anyway (at least, according to
what this passage seems to propose). The sentence “So much the better, there is no message that
indiscreetly outshouts the message that the book itself must communicate directly” speaks to a
philosophy of reading that locates the meaning of a text solely and absolutely between the
reader‟s mind and what is in text itself – not in the world of the author who created it, nor in its
cultural background or critical reception, nor in how it functions within the larger canon of
similar literature. Literature, this sentence intimates, cannot be conveyed in terms that extend
beyond the immediate relationship that evolves between a literary work and its reader. The back
cover of a book can only offer one window into the way it actually functions for a reader; critical
work on the book is mere subjective speculation that cannot, ultimately, offer up any single
reading or interpretation of the work as “correct”. The book must communicate itself directly:
there is no secondary reproduction of the text that is a faithful transmission of the experience of
the work itself.
This is what allows for the creation of a new Don Quixote in its copying, and why, in his
commentary, Kinbote creates an entirely new narrative. Reproductions or analyses of literature,
instead of offering a window into the “reality” of a book, are mere conveyances of one reader or

Stamm 110
critic‟s experience with the work. These works seem to declare that such experiences are not
more correct and should not function to alter or shift an individual perspective or experience of
the work; they simply offer an example of the way in which one person came to assess their
reading of the work. If, perhaps, works of literature were treated as objects that have ultimate and
stable meaning, works that should be considered exactly the same way by every reader, critical
work and literal reproduction would function as a sort of science that could conceivably reveal
an essential nature of each work that holds true for each reader. This would be in line with an
objectivist understanding of reality, a philosophical perspective that posits that reality is its own
phenomenon that humans might come to know through rational inquiry. On the other hand, these
texts stand fundamentally against the concept of a singular and stable real world, one that might
be irrefutably announced as “true” on the back of a book or in the writings of a metaphysician.
There are as many real worlds as there are minds in the world, and nobody else‟s understanding
of this reality has any fundamental connection to one‟s own, insofar as one‟s own experience of
reality is entirely within one‟s mind.
This concept is treated in both the chapters that address the reader directly as “you” (and
which track “your” excursions in understanding both the alternating chapters and the figure of
Ludmilla) as well as the various fictions that comprise the chapters that are really only the first
chapters of various, unrelated novels. The second “first chapter” chapter is set in Poland and
features a young narrator about to live away from home for the first time in his life. This young
man gets into a fight with a boy around the same age. His narration during this fight dislocates
him from the immediate space and time of the story‟s events and consciously addresses his status
as artifice, or one who is being “read” by a reader. This is significant because it directly points

Stamm 111
out the fact that he is a construct of the reader who is watching him as he wrestles with the other
boy.
The passage indicates the falsity of the narrative and the fact that its “reality” is entirely
inside the reader, as one who is outside the text and who enters the story more real than any of its
characters. This reader is in a functional subject-object relationship with the character. This
relationship is mirrored by the narrator‟s angry relationship with the other boy, Ponko, a figure
whom he has the distinct and curious impression of somehow transforming into over the course
of the fight. The text reads as follows:
While we were clutching each other, I had the sensation that in this struggle the
transformation was taking place, and when he rose he would be me and I him, but
perhaps I am thinking this only now, or it is only you, Reader, who are thinking it,
not I: indeed, in that moment wrestling with him meant holding tight to myself, to
my past, so that it wouldn‟t fall into his hands, even at the cost of destroying it . . .
I had been seeking to tear something from my past so as not to leave it to my
rival, to the new me with dog‟s hair, or perhaps already I had been trying to wring
from the past of that unknown me a secret to add to my past or future. (39)
In this passage, the young man is asking a fundamental question about the role his mind plays in
creating his experience of reality. In saying “perhaps I am thinking this only now,” he submits
that his memory has an active role in his current understanding of reality, indicating that
remembering can have the function of warping the present. He has the distinct ability to distance
himself from his own mind and recognize that its experience of the world is mutable, subjective,
and impermanent – and this seems to scare him, as if the lack of objective reality in the universe
indicates that he might not have a self at all. This appears to imply, for him, the fact that the

Stamm 112
entire world as he understands it is entirely grounded in his own perception. This further signifies
that he himself is merely the construct or perception of another, such as Ponko or the reader. In
saying “perhaps… it is only you, Reader, not I, who are thinking it” he reveals a fundamental
skepticism with regards to the objectivity of his own perceptions and thought processes. Ponk
admits both that he creates his own world, and that he also might be part of a world created by
another. He is, of course; he is a character in a novel. In directly pointing out the absolute artifice
of literature, profound commentary on the very character of reading, as a whole, is made
possible. This is the very crux of metafiction.
I would argue that in the acting of calling attention to his own artifice, Ponko assumes a
nature very different than that of most characters in novels. For the most part, characters in
literature function unawares as to the fact that they are being voyeurized by a reader: the world
within the text does not operate as if it is a subject, or being watched, and does not consciously
perform to a reader. Here, the young man is fully aware that he is being watched by a reader –
and in directly addressing this, he breaks down the barrier between reader and text, drawing them
into the work by openly addressing their role in its function. In stating that it might very well be
the reader who is considering Ponko, and not him, he destroys the literary fourth wall: he points
out his status as unreal in relation to something that is real, which, I believe, implicitly states that
any agency he has in the text is only an illusion. This forces the reader into a position where they
must reflect on their own role as a reader, as they are essentially creating Ponko by reading him.
Instead of following the narrative of characters who uphold the semblance of being as real as
their readers, the story becomes about the reader, in a sense. The reader must reconsider the idea
that they are outside the text, as the spotlight is turned on them. It would seem that they are, in
reality, coextensive with it.

Stamm 113
Of course, the novel is written about the very situation of reading, and seems to have
been designed to catalyze self-reflection as a reader. I would argue that this creates a situation in
which critical analysis or interpretation of the work is made extremely difficult: ultimately, the
ground for understanding or discussing this work is within the person reading it – the
identification of the main character as “you” lends the reader a sense of fundamental authority
over the text. I believe that this is part of the “point” of Winter’s Night: as with Pale Fire, the
process of seeking a deeper meaning to the work that compels its reader figure ultimately leads
to no great revelation or knowledge about the work, but reveals a great deal about the character
itself. It could be argued that this is a terminal project: in indicating the meaninglessness of
holding one critical viewpoint over another, all perspectives become equally valid, and the
notion of stable meaning within a work is thrown into a sort of limbo. Thus, immaterialism as a
metafictional device could be conceived of as somehow fatalistic, ending with the ultimate
conclusion that whatever is within the reader‟s mind is the meaningful content of a text, and that
any search for an objective understanding of the text‟s function and meaning is a trick created to
divert readers from their own role in creating the work before them. This radical subjectivity is
redoubled in Winter’s Night by the unavoidable identification of the novel‟s reader with its
reader figure, the main character. The reader‟s journey through Winter’s Night mirrors the main
character‟s journey through “If On A Winter‟s Night A Traveler”; as the main character is left on
ultimately unstable ground regarding the text, so the reader is forced into a position where they
must rethink their approach to reading and the nature of their relationship to the text.
The novel also contains multiple send-ups of formal or academic approaches to literature.
It parodies the kind of engagement with literature that posits that a great deal of research and
historical background on a work is necessary in order to truly understand or have a meaningful

Stamm 114
experience with a text. These instances of parody suggest that the narrator believes in an
immediate experience with literature unclouded by academic or intellectual cant and obligations.
This is demonstrated in several instances throughout the story. For example, Ludmilla‟s sister,
Lotaria, desperately wants to classify and categorize every text she encounters according to what
she presumes to be its correct intellectual grouping; workers at a publishing house are frenzied in
the acts of producing and promoting new novels, seemingly more concerned with the business of
reading than the act itself; professors from separate departments of a local university war over
the correct historical and ethnographic placement of one of the texts included in the mixed-up
edition of “If On A Winter‟s Night A Traveler.” All fail to rise to a pure enjoyment of reading
that surpasses a rational understanding of how the texts function for other people and within the
larger scheme of the literary and intellectual world. These characters are all absurd; their
respective plights are demonstrated with a sly and subtle humor, and it is strongly implied that
the narrator believes that their approach to the written word is vastly misguided, shaped by years
of education and instruction in how to read that places greater emphasis on knowledge that
surrounds the text than on the creativity and individual response of the reader. This is perhaps
best exemplified by the first description of Lotaria. The main character meets her while seeking
Ludmilla‟s counsel on the section of “Winter‟s Night” that seems to be the first chapter of the
Polish novel starring Ponko. The scene plays out as such:
“Well, it‟s a kind of a Polish novel that she‟s also reading. I thought we might
exchange some impressions. Bazakbal‟s novel.” “Polish? What sort?” “Um, it
doesn‟t seem half bad to me.” No, you misunderstood. Lotaria wants to know the
author‟s position with regard to Trends of Contemporary Thought and Problems

Stamm 115
That Demand a Solution. To make your task easier she furnishes you with a list of
names of Great Masters among whom you should situate him. (44)
The use of capital letters at the beginning of “trends of contemporary thought”, “problems that
demand a solution”, and “great masters” indicates the tongue-in-cheek attitude that the narrator
takes toward Lotaria and her perspective on reading. Furthermore, the fact that he does not
identify the specific trends of contemporary thought or problems that demand a solution to which
Lotaria refers compounds his humorous disregard for her inquiries. What is specifically
interesting here is that the main character does not openly agree with the narrator in this regard.
He is a sort of neutral party, overwhelmed by Lotaria‟s taste for a stringent scholarly approach to
reading novels, but himself remaining silent with regards to judgment of her character. In
maintaining the main character‟s neutrality, I would argue that Calvino allows for the reader to
identify with the reader figure – the witty, subtle critique of certain styles of reading is left to the
narrator, and the main character need not assume a partial or biased role that might cause certain
readers to dissociate from him.
This is maintained throughout the entirety of the novel: the reader figure has no solid
opinions or strong voice to mirror or counter the narrator‟s ruminations on reading, but is instead
at the mercy of the texts he reads, the narrator who commands his actions, and Ludmilla. He is
not a well-developed figure by any standard: his personality is entirely enveloped within the
narrator, who directs his actions. This allows him to be a cipher for Winter’s Night‟s actual
reader: because the reader is given such little information about his actual personality or
existence in the world, it is not difficult to fill in the blanks of the reader‟s life with personal
information, allowing for a closer relationship between the reader of Winter’s Night and its
reader figure.

Stamm 116
The text continues:
Again you feel the sensation that you felt when the paper knife revealed the facing
white pages. “I couldn‟t say, exactly. You see, I‟m not actually sure even of the
title or the author‟s name. Ludmilla will tell you about it: it‟s a rather complicated
story.” “Ludmilla reads one novel after another, but she never clarifies the
problems. It seems a big waste of time to me. Don‟t you have this impression?” If
you start arguing, she‟ll never let you go. Now she is inviting you to a seminar at
the university, where books are analyzed according to all Codes, Conscious and
Unconscious, and in which all Taboos are eliminated, the ones imposed by the
dominant Sex, Class, and Culture. (44-45)
The sensation to which the opening line of this passage refers is the feeling of the main character
when he realizes that the novel he purchased is not tome he expected at all, the one which would
continue the story of the section of “Winter‟s Night” immediately prior, but an entirely new one.
That he feels this same feeling during his first encounter with Lotaria reflects his personal
destabilization as a reader that serves as the background for the novel: not only is the text of
“Winter‟s Night” still an utter mystery, with its mixed-up chapters all seemingly from different
books, but here he is faced with the idea that he somehow reads incorrectly. Lotaria is invested in
the idea that her personal approach to reading novels is correct: she cannot conceive of her
sister‟s way of reading, which seems to be driven by a pleasure principle instead of a search to
understand and classify texts according to norms institutionalized and standardized by culture
and academia. In his subtle skewering of her character, the narrator questions the validity of this
attitude, instead championing Ludmilla‟s ability to be lost in a text without assuming an analytic
or notably formal method of reading.

Stamm 117
I would furthermore posit that the narrator aligns himself with both main character and
reader in doing this. The assumption that underlies the sentence “books are analyzed according
to all Codes, Conscious and Unconscious, and in which all Taboos are eliminated, the ones
imposed by the dominant Sex, Class, and Culture” is that the narrator is addressing an audience
that agrees with him or her – the capitalization of “codes, conscious, unconscious and taboo” is
an ironic jab at the fact that those things, as features of a normative intellectual society, have a
certain stature, and that stature is founded on a societal constructs that do not hold true for every
reader. This sentence seems to suggest that both the main character and the reader are somehow
outside of the influence of this construct, or can at least distance themselves from it to the extent
that they might laugh at that sentence, joining the narrator in his or her amusing reproach of
Lotaria.
What perhaps disturbs the narrator the greatest about Lotaria‟s take on literature is its
position that reading is a sort of science, that texts contain falsifiable evidence that serve as
grounds for understanding literary experiences to be objective and undynamic. Winter’s Night
calls for a remarkably unscientific reader who resists every brand of unchanging and categorical
reading. There are several moments throughout the course of the novel that refer to the
fundamental unknowability of the roots of literature, indicating the idea that the written word
extends into a world that is incommunicable and that language exists at the edge of a store of
experience and feeling that is largely untranslatable into words. This implies that one cannot ever
really know what the author was attempting to “do” in his or her writing of a work, and any work
of literary analysis must make intellectual leaps of faith. Critique and analysis then become arts
of supposition and persuasion of a subjective idea to a larger audience, promulgating the idea
that the text being critiqued and analyzed might be reduced to some objective essence or scheme

Stamm 118
of concepts by the critic or literary analyst. Thus the critical work attempts to turn the experience
of a text into something that might be widely shared, rather than something personal. Winter’s
Night rejects this objectification, handing over full critical (and/or uncritical) authority of a work
to each of its readers by implying that the essence of a book is dependent on the individual
reader. This novel wants its readers to experience it as they will.
One key incident that reflects the stance against a conception of literature that sees it not
as a series of fully knowable phenomena occurs during the main character‟s visit with a
university professor. He wants to discuss one of the novels whose first chapter is contained
within “Winter‟s Night.” This professor rhapsodizes about the language in which it was written,
Cimmerian (an invention of Calvino‟s); the features that distinguish Cimmerian from other
languages underscore the entire novel‟s position on the written word:
“Books are the steps of the threshold…all Cimmerian authors have passed
it…Then the wordless language of the dead begins, which says the things that
only the language of the dead can say. Cimmerian is the last language of the dead,
the last language of the threshold! You come here to try to listen there,
beyond…Listen…Cimmerian books are all unfinished”, Uzzi-Tuzzi sighs,
“because they continue beyond…in that silent language to which all the words we
believe we read refer…Reading,” he says, “is always this: there is a thing that is
there, a thing made of writing, a solid, material object which cannot be changed,
and through this thing we measure ourselves against something else that is not
present, something else that belongs to the immaterial, invisible world, because it
can only be thought, imagined, or because it was once and is no longer past, lost,
unattainable, or in the land of the dead …” (72).

Stamm 119
The connection this excerpt has to the immaterialist position on knowledge is undeniable: it
directly identifies the relationship that a reader has to a text as unfolding within the world that is
“immaterial, invisible, because it can only be thought, imagined”. The way in which UzziTuzzi‟s passion for Cimmerian is described stands in harsh contrast to the description of Lotaria:
he is portrayed as a likeable, if mildly obsessive, old man, one who holds fast to his affinity for a
dead language on the basis of a philosophy of reading that is not widely popular. This suggests
that the narrator agrees more with Uzzi-Tuzzi about reading than with Lotaria. Uzzi-Tuzzi
appears to be arguing for a conception of literature that, while identifying books as obviously
static groupings of words and sentences, signifies a fundamental mystery beneath its surface.
Uzzi-Tuzzi firmly states that all readers believe that words refer back to a “silent language,”
something whose meaning is ineffable but which is fundamental to language. It seems that this
something would have to be unknowable, according to immaterialism; the concept of a static,
objective, and knowable truth of reality is a fiction, just as the ultimate root of language,
according to Uzzi-Tuzzi, is in a realm that language itself cannot touch.
Cimmerian, as noted before, is the language of a fictional country. The novel tells its
history: Cimmeria evidently existed as an independent state between World War One and World
War Two, but was thereafter absorbed by surrounding countries. Uzzi-Tuzzi remarks that its
culture, language and literature remain almost completely unknown to the world at large, and
Cimmeria-enthusiasts like him are, for the most part, nonexistent. That Cimmerian is the
fictional language of a fictional country that no longer exists makes sense in terms of the larger
issues, given the function that the Cimmerian language and literatures play against the whole
scheme of If On A Winter’s Night. The mysteriousness of Cimmerian stands as a foil to existing
and developing languages and literature which are enfolded within a system of reading that seeks

Stamm 120
to objectify and analyze them according to the same system of reading espoused by Lotaria.
Because it is essentially apocryphal, Cimmerian resists easy classification and discussion; its
books are all unfinished, mysteries at their core, and the country has all but vanished from
cultural consciousness. This allows for Cimmerian and its literatures to assume a role that is
based entirely on speculation. In this way, Cimmerian is very similar to Tlon: it is an unknown
world with a series of literary works that, upon analysis and investigation, seem to only reflect
the ultimate unknowability of the country from which it comes.
Uzzi-Tuzzi‟s remarks on reading are also reminiscent of Blanchot‟s conceptions of
literature. Both men hold an essential theory of reading that locates the heart of a text in silence
and mystery, as if its ultimate meaning is not inherent to the words themselves, but to whatever
the reader cares to see there, a care which resists temporal permanence, which by nature transient
and difficult to describe. The essence of a text becomes a construct in the reader‟s mind. This
idea, as noted before, is symbolized in the figure of Ludmilla – referred to frequently throughout
the text as the Other Reader. At time, Ludmilla appears to be inextricable, for the main character,
from the “Other” that is the text he is attempting to read. He notes clearly, shortly after the scene
excerpted above, that his interest in the work and his interest in her are indiscernable: upon UzziTuzzi questioning the main character‟s motives for visiting his university office, the narrator
remarks “to be sincere you should answer that you can no longer distinguish your interest in the
Cimmerian novel from your interest in the Other Reader of that novel” (51). Ludmilla holds the
same function that the titular text does in Winter’s Night. The cat-and-mouse game the main
character plays with the text is analogous to the way in which he seeks her. This is compounded
by the fact that, to an even larger extent than his character, Ludmilla‟s identity is completely
founded on her love of reading. Virtually no distinguishing details are given about Ludmilla; she

Stamm 121
is only the beautiful, female Other Reader who, according to her sister, constantly has her nose in
books, and who is – importantly – last witnessed lying in bed next to the main character as they
are both reading.
The lack of character development in this novel allows for its wealth of philosophical
ruminations on the nature of reading and perception to take center stage. I would argue that, like
Ponko, the main character and Ludmilla do not function in the same way that most characters do
in novels; this story, it seems, is not really about them at all – they are necessary elements that
allows the true star of the novel to shine, which is reading itself. One specific, significant idea
that runs throughout the novel is the notion of language‟s limitations. The truth that any piece of
writing is more artificial than the “real world” outside of it and, as such, one can never be
perfectly faithful to the reality of what the writer is trying to express, is contended with over and
over again in Winter’s Night. This is expressed in the scene of Ponko‟s fight and Uzzi-Tuzzi‟s
description of the Cimmerian language: both indicate that language and the novel somehow
extend into a territory that is only made real by imaginative work. In Ponko‟s case, he recognizes
that his very thoughts are contingent upon the existence of a reader to think them into him, in a
sense – Ponko understands that he is the subject of another‟s mental work. For Uzzi-Tuzzi, the
language with which he is obsessed is founded on the belief that beneath language there exists a
whole universe of inexpressible things. Language seems to function as a sort of common
denominator of symbols into which human minds collectively enter, but which is an ultimately
imperfect reproduction of the truth that exists within each mind – a truth that the individual
thinker holds as his or her own, that cannot be conveyed in the sequence of objective symbols of
which language consists.

Stamm 122
This concept is expressed very well in one of the “first-chapter” chapters. The main
character of this particular novel jumps right into a narrative in which he ruminates on language
and its unfortunate restrictions. This excerpt is highly important in light of the reader figure‟s
plight – it seems to offer a profound explanation for the situation of reading that affects all
readers, and is symbolized by his confused journey to understand “If On A Winter‟s Night A
Traveler.” The text reads:
There are days when everything seems to me charged with meaning: messages it
would be difficult for me to communicate to others, translate into words, but
which for this very reason appear to me decisive. There are announcements or
presages that concern me and the world at once: for my part, not only the external
events of my existence but also what happens inside, in the depths of me; and for
the world, not some particular event but the general way of being of all things.
You will understand therefore my difficult in speaking about it, except by
allusion. (55)
What is perhaps most important from this passage is the note that what is concerning is not just
the messages the character receives from the outside world, but that what happens inside of him
is at once as significant and incommunicable as the meaning-charged signals from the outside
world. This, I believe, speaks to an immaterialist experience of the world: what happens within
this main character is something very important, but it cannot be wrought in the terms used by
mankind for collective communication. In this way, language might be conceived as the outside
world into which all human beings necessarily enter – the world which, according to Berkeley, is
created by the mind of God. This is the real world, but human minds derive their own subjective
and isolated experience of it based on personal experience and sense impressions. This subjective

Stamm 123
and isolated world constitutes the fundamental mystery that is each human mind – and as it is
treated in these novels, each novel.
This excerpt seems to underscore the idea that the personal importance we ascribe to the
external world is our own, and the extent to which we believe it comes not from us, but is
inherent to the outside world, is just a personal belief we hold. This could be read as a clue for
the main character of Winter’s Night: as he scrambles to understand the text and Ludmilla, he
does not turn to himself to recognize his true situation as reader, or one who essentially creates
his own experience of the text. He is busy trying to figure out the truth of the things which take
hold of his mind without recognizing his own agency over the text. For the actual reader of this
text, I would argue that the recognition of this agency is unavoidable: their role in the text, as
indicated by Ponko‟s direct addressing of the reader, is made very clear. They are more real than
any of the characters and are functional in creating their world. What is specifically interesting
about that scenario is that the reader of Ponko is both the main character and the actual reader of
If On A Winter’s Night. The “you” to which Ponko refers could be either or both, but given the
later events of the novel, it is clear that while the reader might understand that he or she is the
one thinking Ponko‟s thoughts, the full weight of that declaration evades the main character.
Ludmilla, who I believe symbolizes the style of reading absolutely championed in the
novel, seems to have an innate understanding of the creative role the reader takes over the text.
During the scene in which Uzzi-Tuzzi is meeting with her and the main character, the main
character remarks – not without a hint of envy – that for her, books exist as a result of her desire
to read. The excerpt reads:
“I like to know that books exist that I will still be able to read…” she says, sure
that existent objects, concrete albeit unknown, must correspond to the strength of

Stamm 124
her desire. How can you keep up with her, this woman who is always reading
another book besides the one before her eyes, a book that does not yet exist, but
which, since she wants it, cannot fail to exist? (72)
Ludmilla seems to have come to a solid awareness that her experience with a text is a direct
correlate of her desire to read. This passage, I believe, does not suggest that this is a phenomenon
particular to Ludmilla –the fact that books exist as a result of her wish to read. She is, I would
argue, a reader who has attained an ideal of literary enlightenment. She assumes the attitude
toward reading that Winter’s Night attempts to impress upon both its reader and main character.
This perspective locates the experience of a text in the desire and creativity of a reader; the ideal
reader, then, would be one who is open to explore the worlds hidden within the language with a
freedom and desire unbound by extant concerns, such as those attended to by Lotaria. Ludmilla‟s
mind is what is active in her reading: she does not allow her reading to overcome her, but rather
fills the text with her own desire – her mind, in essence, is what makes the text real. It is noted
that she is a strong-willed character: the narrator remarks that “you understand by now that
Ludmilla, for all her mild manner, likes to take the situation in hand and decide everything
herself: your only course is to follow her” (47). Ludmilla is conscious of her own agency,
understanding her experience of the world as her own, not seeking to find meaning, but to create
it on her own terms.
Ludmilla‟s role as a model for ideal reading is maintained throughout the entirety of the
novel. It seems that the main character‟s quest to understand her, inhabit her mind, and
(ultimately) to date her is a symbol for his desire to figure out how, exactly, to read. What he
seems to miss is that his quest is actually futile: he is looking for an understanding of literature
that he might be able to understand in terms of secondhand or vicarious experience, but this is

Stamm 125
fundamentally impossible: his engagement with the world of literature must come from a place
within himself, not something that can be found in analyzing or pursuing the true meaning of a
story. Throughout most of the novel, he does not seem to realize this, and becomes immensely
frustrated at the circumstances that prevent him from both accessing the real “If On A Winter‟s
Night A Traveler” and Ludmilla. The ending is significant in light of this: in his deciding to
marry Ludmilla, he takes active control of the narrative. In consciously deciding to join forces
with the Other Reader, he signifies his ultimate self-identification as reader and one who has
agency over a narrative – both the narrative that is his life and the narrative represented by
Ludmilla.
The location of the meaning within a text inside of a reader‟s mind is treated in various
instances throughout the novel, not all of which refer to the main character‟s relationship (or lack
thereof) to Ludmilla. The main character finds himself consulting with a worker at a publishing
company who has some noteworthy opinions on the role of the author in the text. These thoughts
seem to reflect Roland Barthes‟s basic premise that the author, as a mythologized figure, is dead
– although here what is being argued is that the author is a functional fiction. This is significant
because it raises the question of authorial control over the content of a work: insofar as the
author is merely another symbol in the text, as a necessary part of the book, the real “author” of a
work then becomes its reader. The scene plays out as follows:
“What does the name of the author on the jacket matter? Let us move forward in
thought to three thousand years from now. Who knows which books form our
period will be saved, and who knows which authors‟ names will be remembered?
Some books will remain famous but will be considered anonymous works, as for
us the epic of Gilgamesh; other authors‟ names will still be well known, but none

Stamm 126
of their works will survive, as was the case with Socrates, or perhaps all the
surviving books will be attributed to a single, mysterious author, like
Homer.”(101)
What is implied by this passage is that the author, as the name on the jacket of a book, is just as
much a part of the book as any one of its characters – as such, the author is not real; he or she is a
necessary part of the overall work known as “book” but is an operative fiction. The speaker here
identifies Homer as being as fictional as “The Odyssey”; the name of Homer, for him, is
included in the general scheme in which modern minds see the epic. There is no distinction
between the author and the work. What this suggests is that the author is not a figure who hides
in the background of a text whose intentions, motivations, and personal leanings might be sought
after or researched as a means by which to come to a greater understanding of the work. The
author is entirely within the work, and he or she is a subject of their own creation. The Calvino
that would come to be known through reading this novel is, as far as any readers can tell, the
only Calvino there is; he is entirely enfolded in the novel. He is not the “real” Calvino, however;
he is the Calvino invented by Calvino as a necessary part of a Calvino book. This idea is initially
toyed with in the section where it is noted that the writer “is known as an author who changes
greatly from one book to the next. And in these changes you recognize him as himself” (9). The
author which is presented in this novel has no identity beyond that which is presented in each
individual work.
This is made more complex by the fact that the author of the text initially sought-after in
Winter’s Night is a fictionalized version of Calvino – a patently Borgesian literary device. I
would argue that the work is doing two things here: first, it establishes a scenario in which the
main character must come to the awareness that they cannot seek to understand an author figure

Stamm 127
outside of the work as a means by which to understand the work itself. Then, it turns to the actual
reader and questions the role that Calvino actually plays in the text; it seems that in saying “he is
known as an author who changes greatly from one book to the next,” Calvino is divesting
himself of the responsibility of filling any expectations he might have established beforehand. He
leaves the question of literary intent to the reader. This, I believe, is part of the greater project
toward which all of the commentary on reading contained within this novel works.
This self-reflexivity is demonstrated not only in the fictionalization of the author, but in
the book‟s own recognition of its limitations. Just as the moment in which Ponko turns to his
reader and notes that it is them that might be thinking his thoughts, not him, there are various
cases in which the fact that fiction is limited by its own unreality is remarked upon. These
instances all seem to remark: it is not for us, as characters in books, to be agents of our own
interpretation; nor can we know what we will actually make our readers think or feel. That is
supplied by the reader. In particular, the characters in the “first chapter” chapters have some
general awareness of the fact that their existent is dependence upon a reader to create them.
There is a sort of resignation inherent to these admissions, as if these characters have had to
come to unfortunate terms with the fact that they are inexorably bound by their own artifice to
being the mere creation of a real, thinking human mind. This resignation is very interesting,
however, because it gives to these characters a reality that their readers cannot access – unless
they too imagine themselves to be a character in a book. The reader of Winter’s Night cannot
empathize with Ponko or any other character who turns to the reader and remarks upon the fact
that they are real, and he or she is not.
However, I would claim that the reader is thus thrown into a position in which he or she
must consider the nature of their own existence in light of the fact that the existence of these

Stamm 128
characters is obviously contingent upon the reader. Ludmilla is, in this novel, more real than any
of the characters from the “first chapter” chapters. They are the subjects of her objectification;
she creates them in her reading. She, in turn, is the subject of the main character‟s objective
mind; her role in the novel is entirely wrapped up in his imagination of her, as he is “reading” her
in a sense, thus creating her. And, of course, this main character is being read by the actual
reader of the novel. I believe that because of this situation, alongside the commentary on reading
that comprises an enormous part of Winter’s Night, the question is implicitly asked: who is
“thinking” the actual reader in order to create him or her? The immaterialist answer to this
question would be God. The fact that the author of a written work, in the analogy between the
real world and the world of the text, serves the functional role of God, must be considered here in
light of the fact that the author of this work seems to want to strip himself of authorial control
over the text. Italo Calvino does not seem to want to transform the readers of his novel into
subjects defined by their identity as reader, as Ludmilla and the main character are – he does not
want to be the God figure in the text. Where, then, is the thinking mind that is necessary for the
existence of this world, in the analogy between mind-world and reader-text relationship?
A better question to ask might be: after a certain point of grappling with immaterialism as
a metafictional device, might attention then be turned to the analogy between the necessity of the
mind to create an experience of the world and the necessity of a mind to create a reality of the
text? It would seem that, in frequently drawing attention to their status as characters in books, the
figures of the “chapter title” chapters in this novel want to completely do away with the illusion
that a book contains a world unto itself. The reader might seek entrance into a world that is not
their own, but in their insistence of their own falsity, he or she is perpetually returned to the fact
that they are engaged in the creative act of reading – and the book is not a self-contained world,

Stamm 129
but a present extension of their mind. There is no “other mind”, such as the mind of the author or
the mind of a character, with which the reader meets and contends; the entirety of the book is
within him or her.
Philosopher Jacques Derrida, in his book Of Grammatology, contends with the question
of the necessity of the mind – which he refers to as the “logos” – in serving as the origin of a
written text. His argument seems to be that the written word cannot be reduced as issuing from a
single point of rationality in the form a single authorizing mind. I believe that this is significant
in light of the lineage that begins with Borges‟s engagement with immaterialism because it raises
the question of the necessity of seeking textual origin in an author in order to have a meaningful
experience with the work. The question here is one of the validity of perspectival viewpoint in
creating meaning from a text: instead of the single objective perspective, such as that provided
by an author or God, that creates a stable real world or text, the mind of every individual is
instead championed as creating their own authentic experience of either a textual world or the
real world. A relevant passage from this work reads:
This “rationality” – but perhaps that word should be abandoned for reasons that
will appear at the end of this sentence – which governs a writing thus enlarged
and radicalized, no longer issues from a logos. Further, it inaugurates the
destruction, not the demolition, but the de-sedimentation, the de-construction, of
all the significations that have their source in that of the logos. Particularly the
signification of truth. (10)
The “rationality…that no longer issues from a logos” is the rationality that is supposed to order
and make cohesive a body of written work. This rationality might be conceived of as originating
in the author. The significations that are then sourced from that logos then become rendered

Stamm 130
meaningless, as the basis of their origin is revealed to be a fiction or a construction. For example,
when the narrator makes the comment that the book “If On A Winter‟s Night A Traveler” does
not resemble anything that matches the protagonist‟s expectations of a Calvino text, he destroys
the existence of elements within the narrative that might signify it as a Calvino text; this is the
groundwork for the situation in which the reader becomes active in authorizing their own
understanding of the work, a view of the work that operates outside of any possible conception
of Calvino. Derrida, I believe, is making the case for the deconstruction of the logos as a
necessary part of textual understanding and interpretation entirely: the concept that there is a
single mental focal point to which written words, as signifiers, point back to, is argued as being
an operative fiction of writing that evolved alongside the historical evolution and trajectory of
writing itself. I would argue that Calvino‟s novel makes a case for this philosophy of reading and
writing.
Derrida does not argue for the destruction of the concept of the signified, but rather for a
re-examination of the distinction between signifiers – i.e., language symbols – and signifieds.
Traditional thought conceives of signifiers as deriving from signifieds; a spatial analogy might
view signifieds as existing in the background, or prior to, their signifiers, which point back to
them. Instead, the meaning of the sign is contained within the sign itself, or within the reader of
the sign, as opposed to something else for which the sign merely stands as code. This is
significant in relation to If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler because of the self-recognition of its
“first chapter” characters as only literary characters and the use of the second-person voice. This
novel, by its very function, announces itself as a part of the reader‟s real world by constantly
attention to the fact that it is a novel, i.e., unreal. Instead of the characters in the “first chapter”
chapters as maintaining the literary illusion that they are ciphers for real people, their artifice is

Stamm 131
foregrounded; the text then becomes an exploration of their artifice. Their meaning is entirely
subsumed within the fact that they are nothing more than characters, or artificial creations– as
opposed to real people being transformed into characters by words and narrative movements.
Similarly, the fact that the narrator directly addresses the reader as “you” places him or her (the
voice is, significantly, un-gendered) in a role in which they can be nothing other than narrator:
the role that they fill is one of pure literary invention, and is not supposed to be anything but. The
fact that the world from which this voice narrates is completely contained within the text that
they are narrating is called into question; the voice of the narrator does not hark back to an
understanding of the world within the text that is somehow hidden or implied to be part of a
larger narrative that extends beyond the work (as might be the case with an omniscient narrator,
or a subjective narrator who is also a character in the novel, such as Charles Kinbote). The
narrator narrates, and he or she is a symbol or signifier for nothing but that which narrates or tells
a story
The concept of the character whose function is purely that of character-in-novel is
demonstrated in the opening of one of the “first chapter” chapters. In the first sentence of this
particular novel-within-the-novel, the character immediately recognizes his role as character in
book, one who is part of a narrative that is distinct from the reader‟s world while its existence is
still entirely contingent on it. In this excerpt, it seems less as if the character is operating within a
fake world that is created by a writer than as if he is indicating his limitations as a fictional
character who is constricted by language in the true signification of that which he intends to
present as real. The text reads:
The first sensation this book should convey is what I feel when I hear the
telephone ring; I say “should” because I doubt that written words can even give a

Stamm 132
partial idea of it; it is not enough to declare that my reaction is one of refusal, of
flight from this aggressive and threatening summons, as it is also a feeling of
urgency, intolerableness, coercion that impels me to obey the injunction of that
sound, rushing to answer even though I am certain that nothing will come of it
save suffering and discomfort. Nor do I believe that instead of an attempted
description of this state of the spirit, a metaphor would serve better. (132)
What I believe this excerpt implies is that a reader derives an understanding of a text
based on their personal supposition of intention by author or character, as opposed to what the
language is actually doing. This allows for questions such as: “what is the writer actually saying
here?” or “what does this work actually mean?.” These questions, according to this philosophy of
reading, would be essentially meaningless: what the writer is actually saying is just what is on
the page, and what the work actually means is contained within the reader, who would be at fault
to base their understanding of the work on assumptions of authorial control and intent or in the
voice or actions of the character. As they are merely artificial creations, characters in novels are
as mutable as the reader wants them to be; the qualities and import of their pain, pleasure, and
life circumstances depends on their reception. This is the dreaded truth of every character within
the “first chapter” chapters of this novel. Their lives are cut short at the moment in which the
chapter stops, never to be continued; in that instance, any semblance of their reality is negated,
and in terms of their engagement with the text, the reader is left at square one.
I believe it is important that all of the “first-chapter” chapters are cut at a moment of
suspense – the instance in which it assumed that both the main character and the actual reader
have become personally invested in the continuation of the narrative. No climax is ever rewarded
with an anti-climax; no thesis or hypothesis with a synthesis. To have done this, I believe, would

Stamm 133
be to have inserted a measure of literary reality into the lives of these fictional characters. The
fact that their reality is negated at the moment in which the protagonist and/or reader have
suspended disbelief in their story compounds the overarching statement each work makes, which
is that it is not real.
Winter’s Night questions the idea that there is any “real” within a novel. By “real,” I
mean a ground or original source to which a reader might look to begin to make sense of a work.
This might also be conceived of as the “logos” or thinking mind that, like the mind of God,
creates the world in its perception. The characters in the “chapter-title” chapters make obvious
the fact that they are constructs; it is, however, also obvious – and ironically so – that Ludmilla
and the main character are also being read. This would imply a hierarchy of realness, where the
actual reader is more real than the reader figure, who is more real than Ludmilla, who is more
real than the characters in the books they read together.
What is important here is that the origin for the realness of each character is not in its
author or to be found anywhere in the text – it is in its readers, who effectively create the entire
world of Winter’s Night in their reading of it. This supports the thesis of Roland Barthes insofar
as it essentially reveals the author, as a figure who reigns over the text and circumscribes its
meaning and interpretation by his or her intentions (making it necessary for the reader to suppose
and infer what the writer was actually doing), to be a myth. The literary world then becomes a
world divorced entirely from the real world, a world that deals in mystification and which is
entirely other – or divorced from a logos. This concept is treated directly toward the end of the
novel, in the form of speculations that constitute an elegant summary of a great bulk of the
thematic content of If On A Winter’s Night:

Stamm 134
How is it possible to defeat not the authors but the functions of the author, the
idea that behind each book there is someone who guarantees a truth in that world
of ghosts and inventions by the mere fact of having invested in it his own truth, of
having identified himself with the construction of words? Always, since his taste
and talent impelled him in that direction, but more than ever since his relationship
with Ludmilla became critical, Ermes Marana dreamed of a literature made
entirely of apocrypha, of false attributions, of imitations and counterfeits and
pastiche. If this idea had succeeded in imposing itself, if a systematic uncertainty
as to the identity of the writer had kept the reader from abandoning himself with
trust – trust not so much in what was being told him as in the silent narrating
voice – perhaps externally the edifice of literature would not have changed at all,
but beneath, in the foundations, where the relationship between reader and text is
established, something would have changed forever. (159)
That “something that would have changed forever”, it seems, would have been the change to the
sort of literature for which this novel argues. This novel is one that deals in uncertainty as a basic
principle; this uncertainty is never resolved or reconciled, but instead becomes the essence of the
text, in a sense. In this way, it is very much similar to Pale Fire: both novels establish a
suspicion of the text insofar as its origin and function is mysterious, and neither answers this
problem. If a resolution need be found in either text, it is in the very fact that it cannot be
resolved – the fundamental mystery is left a mystery, and it is up to the reader to make sense of
the work within their self. Another important connection between this passage and Pale Fire is
the identification of literature as an art of mystification; as mentioned in the prior section,
Kinbote notes that John Shade ascribed to the idea that truth in literature is to be found in its

Stamm 135
mysteries, and this theme runs throughout the entirety of Pale Fire. That in and of itself harks
back specifically to Borges‟s story “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote,” in which the new
style of reading exemplified by Menard‟s writing is said to be one of, among other things,
“erroneous attribution” (44).
This passage asks how it is possible to supersede a reading that relies upon the functions
of the author. For Ermes Marana, it indeed might not be possible; a succinct answer itself might
not be possible. It seems, however, that the novel itself is an answer to that question. This is
largely due to the role that both the narrator and Calvino play in the novel. The narrator, as
mentioned before, consistently makes clear the fact that his or her voice is a strictly narrative
voice. It directs the actions of the main character as he make his way through the text, assuming
no role other than that of a literary device. And insofar as the novel which constitutes the first
“first-chapter” chapter is supposed to be written by Calvino, and remarks about the writerly
persona of Calvino are made in the opening pages, Calvino himself becomes a fiction that is
operative within the text. In doing this, combined with his other multitude of metafictional
techniques, I would argue that Calvino succeeds in moving past “the idea that behind each book
there is someone who guarantees a truth in that world.” There is no “behind” to this book; the
“behind” is within the text, and any further search for an origin is a cat-and-mouse game not
unlike the one played by the main character – or for that matter, Charles Kinbote or the various
main characters of the short stories of Borges.
The search for an ultimate truth to be found within a text constituted largely by a reader‟s
internal world is, similarly, found in Kathy Acker‟s 1986 novel Don Quixote (Which Was A
Dream). Whereas If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler features a reader figure who comes, through
seeking the meaning of a text, to recognize a sort of internal unity with the outside world of

Stamm 136
literature, Don Quixote places the narrative directly inside the main character from page one.
From that point, it explores the nature of radical subjectivity and creation of meaning on the level
of the individual as the main character – the classic Don Quixote re-envisioned as a female
knight on a quest for love – lives through a series of what can perhaps best be described as
waking hallucinations in which it is clear that her mind is more active in the creation of her
reality than any real world. It is frequently speculated that the real world is just a series of
narratives imposed on a subject, and that these narrative might be overcome or warped to fit a
better reality for the individual. These narratives are identified as the traditional narratives of
hegemony: their writers are Christian, white, male, and beneficiaries of capitalism. Don Quixote
stands against each of these institutions as she tries, through her mind, to create a new narrative
and find love on terms unwritten by anybody but herself.
This novel takes the philosophy of immaterialism to a new height: the reader figure is
almost literally living through a textual world in which the reality of exterior narratives is
contested by the creation of new, interior narratives that seek to supplant them. Arguably, the
metaphor between the mind-universe and reader-text relationship need not be conceived of as a
metaphor in this book: the universe is a literal living text, and because the reader figure is living
completely within her own mind, there is no functional distinction between the mind as the body
the creates the universe and any other part of her identity. And, of course, this novel is a
reimagining of Cervantes‟s Don Quixote. This is significant for multiple reasons: firstly, insofar
as the main character is living out a textual, unreal life, it makes sense that events of the plot that
comprise her story would be openly identified as based in a textual reality. Secondly, the figure
of Don Quixote famously lives entirely inside his mind, unable to distinguish between the stories
of chivalry with which he is obsessed and the reality of the world in which he actually lives.

Stamm 137
What is crucial to this version of Don Quixote is that the reader figure is impelled to live within
her own mind as a form of rejection against the world established for her by oppressive forces
whose reality is also based in pre-written narratives. This implies that a new “real world” can be
created simply through mental action, whereas Cervantes‟s Don Quixote has the titular figure as
insane. While the sanity of Acker‟s protagonist is frequently questioned, it is not questioned
more often than the sanity of the entire world, which is portrayed as a brutal dystopia of powerhungry oppressors that make the possibility of real, human love nearly impossible. Throughout
the text, figures of “otherness” are demonstrated as creating meaning by writing their own
personal narratives that stand in contradistinction to the ones provided for them by the white,
Christian, male, capitalist majority.
A critical connection between Don Quixote (Which Was A Dream) and If On A Winter’s
Night A Traveler is that this text seems to be the dreamt of by Ermes Marana, the one which
might have permanently altered his approach to literature: Don Quixote comprises of apocrypha,
false attributions, imitations counterfeits, and pastiche; this is the style for which Kathy Acker is
widely known. This seems to make sense as a link between the two texts, as I would furthermore
argue that the relationship between the main character and the text that is established in
Calvino‟s novel is taken to an extreme in Acker‟s novel. Whereas the life of Calvino‟s
protagonist is founded on a compulsion to understand a narrative outside of himself, the life of
Acker‟s protagonist is founded on a compulsion that comprises a narrative within herself, one
openly acknowledged as being created by her.
One instance of Acker‟s use of pastiche that treats the concept of both immaterialism and
otherness is found toward the beginning of the novel. Seemingly out of nowhere, the narrator –
who is so candidly sympathetic to the main character that it is difficult to distinguish between the

Stamm 138
two – digresses from the plot to discuss a situation of Arabs in the West: “The Arab leaders are
liars; lying is part of the Arab culture in the same way that truth-telling and honest speech‟re
American. Unlike American and Western culture (generally), the Arabs (in their culture) have no
(concept of) originality. That is, culture. They write new stories paint new pictures et cetera only
by embellishing old stories pictures …” (25). The opening sentences of this digression
immediately establish its humor and irony and identifies the speaker with the Arab, nonAmerican “other”. What is ironic here is that Don Quixote is, of course, not an original narrative;
it only exists as an embellishment of an old story. Because of this, and also because of the
irreverent tone of the digression, the speaker implicitly takes the side of the Arabs – this section
is an obvious jab at a Western self-image founded on a construction of the non-Western “other.”
The passage continues: “They write by cutting chunks out of all-ready written texts and
in other ways defacing traditions: changing important names into silly ones, making dirty jokes
out of matters that should be of utmost importance to us such as nuclear warfare” (25). Acker‟s
style is that of pastiche and collage, a seeming patchwork of a number of sourced texts.
Furthermore, in this novel she changes “important names” into “silly ones”; arguably, she does
this in imagining the classical Don Quixote as a lovelorn female knight. Were that not “silly”
enough, the famous Sancho Panza is imagined in this text as a talking dog named St. Simeon,
and various figures from history, such as Thomas Hobbes and Richard Nixon, make appearances
as caricatures symbolic of a hyperbolized version of the roles they play in real cultural memory.
What is most important here, however, is that the Arabs here treat truth not as a sacred
ground, but as a construct. This concept underscores the entirety of Don Quixote – from its
borrowed title and basic trope to the points made by the various instances of cultural criticism
and commentary made within it, truth in this novel is envisioned as a weapon constructed to be

Stamm 139
used against the individual, something that masquerades as authority but which in reality
undermines the power of the individual over their own lives. The truth-makers in this story
would not want the “other” figures, such as the Arabs, animals, other nonwhites, nonheterosexuals and Don Quixote, to ascribe to a philosophy that locates the production of reality
within their own minds. This would serve to undermine their power, and could potentially be the
grounds for revolution.
Don Quixote realizes this. What distinguishes her from other reader-figures is that she
has come to an awareness of the capability of her own mind in creating a personal, subjective
version of reality. Although she comments on the fact that this isolates her from the extant
universe, she also envisions it as liberating. An excellent demonstration of this is seen in a
conversation she has with her canine sidekick, St. Simeon. The text reads as follows:
„St Simeon.‟ Don Quixote could barely utter that name without tears appearing on
the skin below her eyes. „St Simeon the dog may or may not be real because the
St Simeon in my heart is certainly my idea. In fact, I guess it doesn‟t matter
whether or not St Simeon loves me.‟ „If you don‟t care whether he loves you, why
do you care whether you‟ll see him again?‟ „Because of the evil enchanters!‟ Don
Quixote expostulated. „They separated us because they knew that the only thing
that‟ll destroy me is to be apart from the dog (or saint). The dog and I‟re two peas
in a pod. Evil enchanters such as Ronald Reagan and certain feminists, like
Andrea Dworkin, who control the nexuses of our government and culture, „re
persecuting and will continue to persecute us until they have buried and downed,
drown us in our own human forgetfulness.‟ „I don‟t get it.‟ „As soon as we all stop

Stamm 140
being enchanted,‟ Don Quixote explained, „human love‟ll again be possible.‟
(102)
Here, Don Quixote openly admits to the fact that her talking-dog sidekick is most likely a
construct of her own mind. That doesn‟t seem to bother her; for Quixote, her entire experience of
reality is an internal fiction, and those who would seek to replace this belief with the idea that
there is an external reality – a real world over which she has limited control – are forces of
cultural imperialism and personal oppression that take their power in forcing others to believe
that they are not, actually, creating their own personal narratives.
What is important to Quixote here is not that Simeon is real or that he loves her, but that
her ability to fictionalize is not stripped from her. The “enchantment” that must be stopped in
order for human love to be possible is the power of figures such as Ronald Reagan and Andrea
Dworkin to inhabit the minds of those who might otherwise take control of their own stories.
These figures resist them by refusing to play by the normative constrictions imposed by Reagan,
Dworkin, et. al.; they write their own narratives, essentially, absorbing the reality of the outside
world but making sense of it in terms that satisfy and liberate them. At least, that is the ultimate
dream that is the goal of Quixote‟s quest. The ability to rewrite her own story is crucial to
Quixote, who sought but could not find a reality that fit her in a world that saw her as “other”.
The subtitle to the second part of the novel speaks to this, summing it up in a phrase: “Being
born into and part of a male world, she had no speech of her own. All she could do was read
male texts that weren‟t hers.” The narrative that follows, from which the above passage is culled,
demonstrates her mode of resistance against this, which is to produce her own reality.
It is useful to note that the dialect in which Quixote speaks is the same as the narrator‟s
dialect. This makes the distinction between the two confusing; at times, it seems that the narrator

Stamm 141
is Quixote herself, but at other points it is quite clear that she or he is not. This is significant
because it creates a situation that destabilizes what is typically the most consistent voice
throughout a literary work: the voice of the narrator. It gives the impression that Quixote is at
once living through the plot motions and is also distanced from them, narrating her own story
from a time and place distinct from the setting of the character. It also seems to imply that
Quixote desires an objective narrator for her story, but is unable to forge one. I would argue that
this reflects Quixote‟s disjointed internal state, which straddles two realities – the reality of the
life-narrative handed to her by external forces, and the reality she writes for herself.
Don Quixote is a story of the tension that inheres to this state of being: the protagonist
never seems entirely sure that she will be able to effectively destroy external reality through the
actions of her mind, but she continues to try: this is the circumstance of her quest. Insofar as the
narrator and the main character are virtually indistinguishable – their voice is identical, as are
their opinions and personal responses to the various occurrences that comprise the novel – it
seems that Quixote can never quite attain to a view of the world that is at once objective and
entirely her own. One instance which demonstrates Quixote‟s determination to create a new
reality for herself via her own understanding of the world, as well as the narrator‟s identification
with her, is seen in the cavalier admission that Quixote “got rid of” Richard Nixon – and why
this is not enough for her:
Don Quixote got rid of Richard Nixon. Death had won Don Quixote‟s first assault
against America. Death lies everywhere. The green and yellowed plains house
nuclear weaponry. The cities stink. Of beggars with real cut-off legs held together
by wires, sitting next to four-million dollar buildings. Of artists who‟re so
uneducated they don‟t know there‟s no chance of becoming anything else but a

Stamm 142
beggar, of becoming a successful artist. There‟s no sexuality. When dying take all
the time, there‟s no time. Nature is abomination. Nixon, a minor fact in nature, no
longer mattered. Don Quixote realized that defeating Nixon isn‟t defeating
America and that to defeat America she had to learn who America is. What is the
myth of America, for economic and political war or control is now taking place at
the level of language or myth. (117)
Here, it is made clear that Don Quixote wants to do away with the American narrative that
governs both her life and the lives of those around her. She “gets rid of Richard Nixon” –
although the actual means by which she does this, the event in which she does away with him, is
never mentioned. This reflects the magical thinking of Don Quixote: in one instant, the brutality
and negativity that surrounds Nixon is mentioned; in the next, she “gets rid of” him, ostensibly
due purely to the fact that she wanted to be rid of him. This is the sort of logic that rules her life;
her opinions and desire are the basis for her reality as she creates her own story in order to create
her own world.
What is specifically interesting in the above passage is the note that “economic and
political war or control is now taking place at the level of language or myth.” This is precisely
why Don Quixote is an empowered figure: although she has no political or cultural agency, her
ability to transform personal visions and hopes for herself into a sort of story is as good as having
actual political clout. The implication here is that in the present-day dystopia (as identified by
Quixote), the ability to live inside one‟s own mind and supplant old cultural myths with new
ones is personally empowering. Quixote, I would argue, is as much a reader figure as any from
texts by Nabokov, Calvino, and Borges; the text she is reading, however, is the story handed to
her by external forces. In her trying to understand this narrative, she both comments upon it and

Stamm 143
creates her own, in the same way as Kinbote. The fact that she is re-writing a famous fictional
life reflects this: Cervantes‟s Quixote, as a male figure created by a male writer, included in the
canon of renowned world literature, is exterior to the existence of Acker‟s Quixote. It might be
useful to note here that throughout her entire career, Acker existed on the fringes of the literary
world; her most notable influence was William S. Burroughs, and she never gained the
widespread recognition that befell Borges, Nabokov, and Calvino.
The popular literary world, then, is as much the world of the oppressive hegemony –
supplying figures such as Acker‟s Quixote (and arguably Acker herself) with both actual
narratives and cultural meta-narratives – as are Ronald Reagan, Richard Nixon, and the entire
sphere of straight, white capitalist males. For the heroine to be “Don Quixote” is ironic not only
because she is female, but because Cervantes‟s classic represents a tradition from which female
writers and heroines have been barred: how many female knights or major heroes have come out
of classical literature? Whereas Cervantes‟s Quixote saw windmills as giants and lived out a faux
chivalric existence, Acker‟s Quixote sees famous texts written by males as fodder for new stories
and lives out an existence that is chivalric because its new reality not only supersedes the
boundaries of what mental action is supposed to be capable of, but because it is culturally
subversive. Acker‟s treatment of immaterialism gives a voice to the “other” ignored by traditions
of every make and mark, identifying it as a philosophy that empowers on the basis of its radically
subjective implications.
This radical subjectivity, expressed on the level of language and thought, is exemplified
in a particularly moving passage toward the novel‟s end. The heroine still seems to be isolated,
cut off from any reality beyond the one she creates within herself. Her only friends are dogs, and

Stamm 144
she is coming to terms with the fact that all which she knows is a mere construct within her
psyche:
Don Quixote Explained Poetry To The Dogs: „I write words to you whom I don‟t
and can‟t know, to you who will always be other than and alien to me. These
words sit on the edges of meanings and aren‟t properly grammatical. For when
there is no country, no community, the speaker‟s unsure of which language to use,
how to speak, if it‟s possible to speak. Language is community. Dogs, I‟m now
inventing community for you and me. I who am at the edge of madness. Mad, all I
have vision: what I alone see.‟ (191)
In this passage, Quixote posits the creation of a new language as a means to form a union
between herself and the dogs – her only source of friendship and personal community, as she has
abandoned the human world (which she identifies as having first abandoned her). The
acknowledgment that “language is community” is highly significant: throughout the text,
Quixote rejects “high” language and conventional structures of grammar and syntax as a means
to break or subvert the linguistic fabric that holds together the oppressive external world against
which she fights. The words she speaks “sit on the edges of meanings”, refusing to fall into
categories or definition established by anybody but herself; to speak the language of the external
world, it seems, would be to negate the reality of herself.
This passage is also significant because she openly recognizes that her world is a
visionary one; all she has is what she alone sees. In this novel, that situation is imagined as at
once profoundly empowering and isolating. She comes to this recognition through constant
internal battles with a world she hopes to improve, or at least understand, but is left with the final
conclusion that she must accept a visionary view of the world if it is to ever be anything but

Stamm 145
denigrating and oppressive to her. As a reader-figure, this distinguishes her from the reader
figures of Calvino, Nabokov, and Borges: whereas they are left either in a state of speculation as
to their role in understanding the texts which play “subject” to the object that is their minds or, at
best, form a sort of unity of themselves and the text (as the ending of If On A Winter’s Night A
Traveler demonstrates), Acker‟s Quixote begins from a point at which the text and the readerfigure are unified. The life of the reader figure is a textual life, and there is no tension between
the real world and the textual world, as they function as one and the same for the reader. She
lives out a life in which fiction and reality are blurred as a means to show that the “reality”
posited by others is merely an operative fiction.
It is critical that this transpires on the level of language. For the reader-figures of Borges,
Nabokov, Calvino, and Acker, the realities that they seek to understand are linguistic realities –
worlds created through language. The metaphor that connects Berkeley‟s relationship between
the human mind and its subjective universe and the reader figures in these works and the texts
they mentally inhabit is such that the elements that a reader reconstructs in his or her mind to
make sense of the textual world are purely wrought in language and language structures. In
creating her own language, Don Quixote creates the ultimate new textual world. It is not just that
her speculation and commentary on a work comprises the work itself, as is the case with Charles
Kinbote or the protagonist of Winter’s Night. Because, for her, there is no separation between the
universe outside her mind and the textual world – the real world is, functionally, a text that she
borrows around which she constructs her life – the only way in which she can create a personal
new world, or new text, is to radically re-conceive of how language is used and what is can do.
As she notes, language is community; in order to forge a new community, she needs to forge a
new language. This is mirrored by Don Quixote‟s highly unusual structure, which is a pastiche of

Stamm 146
various narratives seemingly culled from a variety of different sources. This collage forms a
picture of the protagonist‟s mind as she wanders through a world that has become dystopic due
to its submission to various hegemonic powers. These are the powers that construct the reality
against which she battles by replacing their reality with hers.
Acker‟s novel is strikingly different from Pale Fire, If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler,
and the short stories of Borges. The main difference is that there is no external text that its
protagonist, as a reader figure, seeks to understand or make sense of. However, as I have argued,
I believe that the external text the protagonist seeks to understand is the narrative of the world in
which she finds herself, a world which makes little sense and in which the operative characters
seem far more like caricatures than actual human beings. This is a progression from the situation
of If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler, in which the text is represented by an actual text (from
which the novel derives its title) and a character in the story (Ludmilla) and in which the lines
between the protagonist‟s life and the narrative that compels him begin to blur. The novel‟s end,
in which he decides to marry Ludmilla, is symbolic of his union with the textual world, as I have
noted before; Don Quixote begins her story already unified with a textual world, and she lives
out a real fantasy-battle fought on the level of language.
There are other significant differences between Acker‟s novel and the others examined in
this paper. For one, Acker experiments the most radically with style and content organization in
her novel. The pastiche, cut-up style of Don Quixote follows no pattern of logic. It is also written
in a distinctly lowbrow dialect and includes explicit descriptions of brutal violence, transgressive
sexual acts, and harsh swearing as a part of the heroine‟s overall linguistic project, which seeks
to reveal the most chilling and base elements of oppression. The fact that the books seems to

Stamm 147
have an obvious cultural agenda and political bent also distinguishes it from the texts by Calvino,
Nabokov, and Borges.
I would argue that these differences do not problematize Acker‟s inclusion in the
genealogy, but constitute an instance in which variations on the Borgesian approach to
Berkeley‟s immaterialism are highly obvious. This novel includes a reader figure who creates the
meaning of a textual universe in her own mind; that this textual universe has obvious
connections to the real world does not negate the essential situation of the main character‟s
engagement with the outside world, or textual world, which is deeply immaterialist. It is also an
interesting place to reflect on the trajectory of this genealogy across time. The short stories of
Borges were published in the 1940s; Nabokov‟s novel was published in 1962; Calvino‟s in 1979,
and Acker‟s in 1986. Each text reworked Borges‟s treatment of immaterialism in terms that fit
the overall novel, but remained true to the trope of a reader whose engagement with a text is such
that its reality is located entirely inside his or her psyche. It is true that Acker‟s novel has ethical
concerns and is quite obviously part of a feminist project that extends beyond Acker and does not
need Borges; however, the ethical concerns of Acker‟s novel are not immediately relevant to her
use of Borgesian techniques.
I believe that Don Quixote (Which Was A Dream) is also a useful place to conclude the
genealogy. Borges‟s approach to George Berkeley‟s immaterialist position on idealism saw some
of its most significant iterations in Pale Fire, If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler, and Acker‟s
Don Quixote. Each novel has its fundamental differences, and yet the manner in which they
appropriate Borges‟s original use of the immaterialist philosophy is essentially the same. The
metaphor that connects the human mind and the outside world to the figures of a reader and a
text are highly important for the ways in which all of these texts come to be known as

Stamm 148
metafictional. This is due to the fact that the location of the meaning or reality of a text within
the mind of a reader is precisely what allows for greater commentary on the state of reading in
and of itself to unfurl.
While the genealogy here ends with Kathy Acker, it radiates into the future of literature
in the form of other writers, writings, and theorists that adopted a stance on reading similar to the
one espoused in the meta-narratives of each text considered in this paper. A profoundly
important question underscores these works when considered in conjunction with one another: if
the meaning of reading fiction is, in fact, based entirely on subjective impression, and if the
derivation of truth and meaning in novels and short stories is only relevant on the level of the
individual, how do writers contend with this in the present day, and how might they contend with
it in the future? Arguably, the radical subjectivity that serves as the theoretical foundation for
each of these works is part of a nihilistic project: insofar as each reader‟s perspective is equally
valid and serves to “create” the written work unto himself or herself, it would seem that a shared
discourse or dialogue about literature would be functionally meaningless, and the meaning of
each work simply “ends” with every individual reading of it.
By their very nature, the texts considered in this work resist being defined summarily as
part of a larger category or genre of literature (except, perhaps, “literature that comments on
literature”) or as including a set of shared features, beyond a desire to serve as both fiction and
literary theory. Because each work stands alone, and because of what is implicit within the
content of the work itself, it is left to the individual writer to interpret and build on the issues
presented in Pale Fire, If On A Winter’s Night A Traveler, the short stories of Borges, and Don
Quixote (Which Was A Dream). On one hand, the theoretical implications of these works might
constitute an instant in which the writer, looking to Borges, Nabokov, Acker, and Calvino as a

Stamm 149
foundation for their own writing – as the latter three writers did with Borges – must be entirely
self-reliant in their engagement with these works, unable to default to tradition or shared notions
of the function and meaning of these texts. She or he would be writing in a vacuum of sorts, in
which he or she is forced to invent their own literary values or do away with any notion of right
or wrong reading or writing. On the other hand, this might allow for greater freedom of writing,
interpreting, and theorizing. The express project of Borges, and the avant-garde literary circles
with which he was associated, was to redefine and re-examine what language and literature could
do. This sparked a tradition defined only by a categorical resistance to tradition, to being bound
by concerns of evaluation based in literary theory that could easily become outmoded or stale.
Works within this tradition resist this problem by asking timeless questions about the very
essence of fiction reading in and of itself; that these questions are never easily answered reflects
their position of fundamental subjectivity, allowing for a seemingly infinite amount of
conclusions to be drawn from them, or, perhaps, no conclusion at all.
This, I believe, constituted a significant shift in the history of literature: the innovations
of certain seminal twentieth century writers created a situation in which each of their works
constituted a sort of genre unto itself, due largely to the degree of self-reflexivity and selfawareness within each work. Of these writers, Jorge Luis Borges was certainly one of the most
radically innovative and most significant, both in terms of his widespread recognition during his
life and in the influence he held, and continues to hold, over other writers. A very small fraction
have been acknowledged in this paper; any attempts at listing or discerning all of the writers who
are indebted to his work would, undoubtedly, be incomplete. What is perpetually compelling
about Borges, in light of this, is that he envisioned and espoused an image of himself not as a
great writer, but as one ultimately defined by a love of reading: Borges was a reader before a

Stamm 150
writer. In this way, the very figure of Borges himself is an embodiment of “the death of the
author” that haunts literary theory of the twentieth century. In his writings, Borges aligns himself
with his readers: he, too, is one impelled to take journeys into unreal worlds and mental spaces
made possible only by the written word. This is evident in his self-fictionalization and also in his
non-fictional works, in which he writes passionately of himself as a reader. Borges made no
claims as to what literature was or the correct way to read or approach a text; the overarching
impression he gives is that of one as delightfully mystified by the entire institution of reading and
writing itself as any of his readers. He espoused the virtues of reading for pleasure, and was not
selective in what he read. He read for the sake of reading, and provided more questions than
answers about the notion of reading in and of itself.
Perhaps a definitive resistance to stable theories of literature, then, is not a nihilistic
outcome of a distinctly twentieth century compulsion to ruthlessly innovate and create works
which question their own meaning. It could be, instead, a mode of literary engagement that
reveals a desire to take pleasure in the mysteries of the textual world – a space committed to
honoring the fantastical, the unnecessary, the impossible, and the speculative within every
reader. These works, I would argue, champion the reader as the true hero of every fictional work.
The reader begins a quest every time she or he turns to the first page, subjecting themselves to
the author‟s experimentations. He or she might not be left on stable ground – for the texts
considered in this paper, he or she will likely come away with more questions than answers, and
might be at a loss to easily describe the work they just encountered. That, of course, is not a
problem; these works defy understanding by their own design, and in doing so raise issues of
what it means to “understand” any text.

Stamm 151
There are no solid or stable answers to the issues raised in these works, but there are –
ideally – instances in which the mind of a reader and the world of a text become one, moments
which exist independently of the need to classify a text‟s function or meaning. This is the instant
in which the main character of In On A Winter’s Night A Traveler decides to marry Ludmilla; it
is the fanaticism of Charles Kinbote, possessed as he is by John Shade; it is the moment in which
the fictional Borges peers into the Aleph and when, in another tale, he begins to understand that
the reality of Tlön is leaking into the reality of Earth. In these moments, each of these readers is
overcome by a textual world to the extent that “understanding” the world becomes meaningless,
and they have subjected themselves entirely to the written word as a space of positive
mystification. The lack of answers or stability inherent to these works is, ultimately, a love note
to that which defies rational understanding and to the ability of literature to defy any and all
perceived limitations of what the written word can do. With each reading of a Borges story, a
new Borges story is written; because of this, these works and all that claim them as influential
will continue to enchant and mystify, and their meaning and truth, in their beautiful mutability,
will continue to radiate outward.

Stamm 152

Works Cited

Acker, Kathy. Don Quixote, which was a dream. New York: Grove Press, 1986. Print.

Berkeley, George. A treatise concerning the principles of human knowledge. New
York: Barnes & Noble, 2006. Print.

Berkeley, Georges, and Colin M. Turbayne. Three dialogues between Hylas and
Philonous. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1954. Print.

Blanchot, Maurice. Death sentence. Barrytown: Station Hill, 1978. Print.

Borges, Jorge Luis. The Aleph and Other stories, 1933-1969, together with commentaries
and an autobiographical essay. [1st ed. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1970. Print.

Borges, Jorge Luis, Donald A. Yates, and James East Irby. Labyrinths: selected stories
& other writings. New York: New Directions, 2007. Print.

Calvino, Italo. If on a winter's night a traveller. San Diego [u.a.: Harcourt, Brace,
Jovanovich, 1981. Print.

Derrida, Jacques. Of grammatology. Corrected ed. Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1998. Print.

Stamm 153

Fitzgerald, Kevin. "The Negative Eschatology of Maurice Blanchot." Maurice Blanchot.
N.p., n.d. Web. 24 Mar. 2011. <http://www.studiocleo.com/librarie/blanchot/kf/>.

Leitch, Vincent B.. The Norton anthology of theory and criticism. 2nd ed. New York: W.
W. Norton & Co., 2010. Print.

