Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2011

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2011

The American History of Repression (a Camp
Parody): Performance, Identity, and Society in
James Ellroy's Underworld USA Trilogy
Evan P. Bustria
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Bustria, Evan P., "The American History of Repression (a Camp Parody): Performance, Identity, and Society in James Ellroy's
Underworld USA Trilogy" (2011). Senior Projects Spring 2011. Paper 189.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2011/189

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2011 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

The American History of Repression (a Camp Parody):
Performance, Identity, and Society in James Ellroy's Underworld USA Trilogy

A Senior Project
Submitted to the Division of Languages and Literature

by

Evan Bustria

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
2011

For Jamie Bernard

Thanks Goes to Kevin Teryek, Maria Gomez, Megan Deveau, The Bernards, Deirdre d'Albertis,
Matthew Mutter, Paul LaFarge, Cole Heinowitz, My Friends at Bard College and The College of
Santa Fe/Santa Fe University of Art and Design, Mom, Dad, and Andrew.

Table of Contents
Introduction

1

Spite, Camp, and Gossip-Rags
in American Tabloid

11

Schizophrenia, Repression, and
Revolution in The Cold Six Thousand

40

Conclusion

74

Introduction
James Ellroy, best known for his books The Black Dahlia and L.A. Confidential, is
generally categorized as a crime writer, but is more accurately a historical fiction writer with a
very specific focus. As Luc Sante writes, "[For Ellroy] crime is an underlying reality, not an
exceptional circumstance. He views the history of the United States in the twentieth century as
something like an extended caper novel…and he clearly intends to be the Balzac of this epic"
("Low Lifes"). Ellroy's novels, particularly The Black Dahlia and L.A. Confidential (part of his
L.A. Quartet along with The Big Nowhere and White Jazz) involve white cops who investigate
gruesome murders, which lead inexorably to historic moments of city development. Crime is a
means to which Ellroy investigates his pet interest, namely class and race struggle facilitated by
Los Angeles' population explosion after the Second World War. The white cops are generally
burdened by emotional trauma and are further compromised psychologically when they are
required to participate in racist violence by the LAPD. As historian Jonathan Walker writes,
"Murders…are always symptoms, expressive of and intimately connected to the wider culture,
not just isolated causes mechanically driving a plot. In other words, the psychosexual disorders
of his murderers are presented as microcosms of wider social practices" (183). Ellroy writes
history as political oppression and psychological repression.
Recently, Ellroy finished his Underworld USA Trilogy, which is comprised first of
American Tabloid (1995), then The Cold Six Thousand (2001), and finally Blood's a Rover
(2009). Ellroy takes his particular lens to the '60s and '70s and expands his scope to America as a
whole. The books are structured around the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy, Martin
Luther King Jr., and the death of J. Edgar Hoover. The books are highly unusual crime thrillers.
They are manic, dense, and massive. They require the reader to keep track of an unwieldy

amount of information, which is conveyed in a blunt, compressed style that is alternately
seductive and alienating. Events occur at such a rapid clip that they confuse. The content of the
trilogy is repellent—the violence is brutal, the heroes and villains are evil, and the narrative
voice delights in racist, homophobic, and sexist invective. Everything from content to form is
exaggerated to the point of self-parody.
In short, the trilogy is a tough sell even for fans. It seems as if Ellroy wrote the novels
with his particular fanbase in mind. There is a general assumption his reader has already taken
the leap into his dark, moral worldview. The assumption he makes about his audience is partly
why, despite the fact that his novels are bestsellers, he is only talked about in niche circles. His
public persona doesn't help—it oscillates between self-immolating and endearing (mostly the
latter), a character that would launch a reading with the ridiculous "Good evening, peepers,
prowlers, pederasts, and pedants" and declare himself "the white knight of the far right"
(Timberg, "James Ellroy's L.A.") then speak movingly about his mother's murder and the
shadow it cast over his life. It usually takes several minutes for an interviewer to break past the
clown persona and get at the "real" Ellroy, who at this point in time, has spun his autobiography
into his own myth. These details are fascinating (his memoir My Dark Places) and his stated
obsessions inform his work. However, reviewers and academics have a tendency to use these
details to psychoanalyze him through his writing. Earlier this year, Ellroy had a TV show called
James Ellroy's L.A.: City of Demons. In the pilot, he discussed the death of his mother, the Black
Dahlia murder, and his obsession with these dead women. He appeared opposite a talking,
computer-generated pit bull named Barko. If it isn't entirely obvious, his tongue is planted firmly
in his cheek. I remember reading on an Internet comment board that Ellroy created a persona that

was the type of person who writes the sort of books he writes: loony, self-promoting, funny,
abrasive, desperately seeking attention, and grating.
Disregarding Ellroy's persona, there is a complicated investigation of performance in the
three novels. In the novels, a white power structure runs the country. It is a chaotic structure
formed out of strained allegiance between the FBI, CIA, and the Mafia. Over the course of the
novel, characters have to perform roles in order to participate in this society. In American
Tabloid, Kemper Boyd, a WASP performs variations of his white identity to ingratiate himself
with the John F. Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy, the Ku Klux Klan, and the mafia, among others.
He is a "glib dissembler" (54). Wayne Tedrow, in The Cold Six Thousand, attempts to perform a
progressive white cop identity that roundly fails. In Blood's a Rover, Marshall Bowen, a
undercover gay black cop, is allowed into the white power structure and has to mimic white
authority. Undercover, he has to perform as a black militant for the white authority.
It is useful to provide a brief summary of the books themselves, seeing as they are
crowded and intricately plotted. American Tabloid takes place between 1958 and 1964,
beginning with Howard Hughes' purchase of the fictional tabloid Hush-Hush and ending in John
F. Kennedy's assassination. It's told in third-person perspective and is limited to the perspectives
of Pete Bondurant, Kemper Boyd, and Ward Littell. Pete is an enforcer for both Howard Hughes
and Jimmy Hoffa. In the beginning of the novel, he flies to Miami to kill an informant on Hoffa's
Teamsters to Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, who is targeting the mob through the
McClellan Committee. The McClellan Committee investigated organized crime during the time
period and focused their efforts on Hoffa and the Chicago Mob. Miami has a seductive hold over
Pete, who becomes increasingly involved with Hoffa's Tiger Kab taxi chain and its Cuban
employees. After Pete is arrested in Miami, he is bailed out by the CIA and becomes part of an

unofficial operation to oust Fidel Castro. The operation is supported by the Mafia, whose
casino's Castro nationalized, and staffed by the Ku Klux Klan. The operation is funded through
the distribution of heroin to non-white Miami neighborhoods. The operation ends in the Bay of
Pigs fiasco in 1961.
Kemper Boyd is a corrupt federal agent who FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover plants in
Senator John F. Kennedy's inner circle. The Kennedys pose a significant threat to Hoover—
Robert F. Kennedy's anti-Mob investigations contradict FBI mandate. The FBI refused to
recognize organized crime and focused its efforts largely on left-wing activists. A Kennedy in
the White House could be the end of his career. Kemper's goal is to both observe and subvert the
campaign. However, Kemper becomes entranced with the Kennedy family, falling in love with
John's personality and Robert's sense of justice. He is contacted by the CIA and moonlights as a
trainer for the anti-Castro Cubans. Robert Kennedy takes a pro-civil rights stance, further
incensing Hoover, who considered the movement a Communist rebellion. Kemper asks to be
assigned to the Justice Department's civil rights squad, which enforced integration in the south.
Both the right-wing Cubans and the left-wing civil rights activists move him. The Kennedy
family shuns him when they suspect him of sabotaging the family.
Ward Littell is another FBI agent and Kemper's best friend. He is bullied for his liberal
politics and alcoholism at work and is assigned the humiliating task of investigating left-wing
activists for the Counter Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO). COINTELPRO was a series of
surveillance projects that targeted subversives, in this book suspected Communists, through a
variety of illegal means—wire-tapping, blackmail, and harassment. Littell desires to be part of
the Top Hood Program, which Hoover created to appease Littell's idol Robert Kennedy. He has a
deep hatred for the mafia that rivals Kennedy's own. Through Boyd, Littell becomes Kennedy's

secret agent in Chicago. Kennedy only knows him by the alias the Chicago Phantom. His
reckless and obsessive behavior compromises his investigation. When he gets close to the
Teamster's secret fundbooks and tapes, the evidence that could send the Mafia's top brass to
prison, Pete is called in and beats him within an inch of his life. Littell manages to steal the
fundbooks, then discovers proof that the Mafia funded John F. Kennedy's campaign. The FBI
disowns him and Kennedy follows suit. Littell suffers a breakdown and becomes his opposite, an
apathetic Mafia lawyer to seek revenge on the Kennedy family. He coerces Kemper and Pete in
the Mafia plot to kill Kennedy. Kemper ruins his plan and Littell kills him. The Mafia formulates
a new plan and kills Kennedy.
The Cold Six Thousand is even more plotted and suffers under the strain. Pete and Littell
return and Wayne Tedrow Jr. takes Kemper's place. The weakest part of the novel (and the
trilogy) involves Pete. Still aching from the failed Cuban cause allies himself with the CIA in the
insane hope of resurrecting another anti-Castro movement. It repeats the same beats from the
previous novel—Pete goes to Southeast Asia with the CIA to coopt land from South Vietnam
and Laos in order to produce heroin. The heroin is sold to poor communities in Las Vegas in
order to keep the civil rights movement away from the city. Pete learns that CIA agents and the
mafia had no interest in Cuba. He kills the agents and retires.
Much more interesting are Littell and Wayne's storylines. Events following the Kennedy
assassination reignite his liberal passions. He falls in love with a woman who discovered the
assassination conspiracy when she was investigating the Mafia to avenge her father's death. He
witnesses Robert F. Kennedy's comeback from his brother's death and Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr.'s growing success in the South. However, he's enslaved to Hoover and the mafia. The mafia
assigns him to eavesdrops on Kennedy's conversations and Hoover tasks him with donating dirty

money to the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in order to defame them. Littell
participates in Hoover's anti-civil rights Counter Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO), a
mandate to entrap and defame the movement. He attempts to subvert Hoover and the mafia and
experience the growing liberalism vicariously through Kennedy and SCLC advisor Bayard
Rustin. The COINTELPRO fails and King is assassinated. When King and Kennedy are
assassinated, he is wracked by guilt and commits suicide.
Wayne Tedrow Jr. begins the novel as a progressive cop. He is coerced by his hatepropagandist father and the mob to find and kill Wendell Durfee, a black criminal who maimed a
casino croupier in self-defense. He finds Durfee and lets him run away. However, Durfee turns
out to be a sexual psychopath. Wayne's wife is murdered and he descends into racist violence. A
brilliant chemist, he joins Pete in Southeast Asia and cooks heroin. When he returns, he is given
information regarding Durfee's whereabouts and finally kills him. Dwight Holly, Wayne's
childhood friend and corrupt FBI agent, threatens him with arrest. Holly and his father force
Wayne to participate in the King assassination. By the end of the novel, he and his stepmother
murder his father out of revenge.
The plot of the Blood's a Rover is much stranger than the previous novels. The
oppression-via-heroin motif persists, though this time the actual distribution of drugs is less
schematic. Dwight Holly and Wayne return. Both are involved in an FBI plot to discredit the
rising Black Nationalist movements like the Black Panthers by entrapping smaller criminal
organizations in heroin distribution. They employ Marshall Bowen, a gay black cop. Wayne has
an apostasy when he falls in love with Mary Beth Hazzard, a black woman he widowed, and
searches for her lost son Reginald. Dwight's relationships to two white liberal women, the radical
Joan Klein and the pacifist Karen Sifakis, force him to reconcile his political beliefs. Dwight and

Joan conspire to assassinate Hoover. Karen is responsible for the 1972 Media, Pennsylvania
Break-In—activists broke into an FBI archive and stole files pertaining to COINTELPRO. A
new protagonist, the voyeuristic private investigator Don "Crutch" Crutchfield investigates a
ritualistic murder in Los Angeles, which leads him to a shadow economy of emeralds that unites
the characters in the books.
In this project, I will analyze the first two books, American Tabloid and The Cold Six
Thousand, through two different frameworks. In my analysis of American Tabloid, I will three
articles, two critiques of the American zeitgeist and a recent tabloid story to give an overview of
the emotional world Ellroy attempts to recreate. Then, I will examine American Tabloid as an
exaggerated parody of crime fiction. I use Susan Sontag's "Notes on Camp" and Andrew
Britton's "Notes Against Camp" to examine the camp sensibility, the performance of a subject
flouting social mores by mimicking them, and the social issues camp performance raise. I will
look at the construction of archetypes in the crime genre as represented by Pete Bondurant and
Barbara Jahelka Lindscott as well as the performers of camp in Kemper Boyd and the secondary
characters Laura Hughes and Lenny Sands. In the end, I hope to show how the exaggerated genre
parody interacts with the performance of the characters to imitate and critique an oppressive
society. Through these characters, I will examine Ellroy's perspective on the relationship
between identity and an oppressive society and how he uses narrative voice to mimic this
relationship.
In The Cold Six Thousand, the themes of identity and repression are much more
pronounced. The plot of the novel concerns the collapse of identity, of sense of self. Wayne
Tedrow Jr. and Ward Littell suffer from the failures their "stable" identities. I will examine the
novel using Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari's Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. In

the essay, I will discuss the composition of the white power structure--the alliance of the FBI, the
Mafia, the old Ku Klux Klan—and chart its gradual disintegration caused by the civil rights
movement. The large-scale psychological movements are reflected in the two protagonist's own
psychologies. Because of their place in the white power structure, the protagonists find their
current identities (Wayne as a white progressive cop and Littell as an apathetic mafia lawyer
invalid) and locate their angst in the oppressed to negative and positive ends. I will use the
schemes provided by Deleuze and Guattari of the schizophrenic, the neurotic, and the
revolutionary. To put it in simple terms that may threaten to reduce them: the schizophrenic is
able to split from the demands society places on him but remains apart; the neurotic is a one who
splits from society, identifies the flows that repress him, but returns in self-defeat to participate
in the system that represses his desires; and the revolutionary is a one who splits and is able to
free the flows that repress him and reinvest those flows into society. In The Cold Six Thousand,
the schizophrenic is Littell. He desires to be part of an egalitarian social system, something his
new identity as a FBI agent and mafia lawyer makes impossible. Like Kemper Boyd, he becomes
different persona, identifying equally as an FBI agent, as a mafia lawyer, and as the liberal
crusader he once thought he was. Because of his dissembling and because of social forces he
cannot control, he remains on the fringe and commits suicide. The neurotic is Wayne, who
identifies himself as a progressive authority figure. It is destroyed rather violently by Wendell
Durfee, and Wayne descends into racist hatred. He returns to society as a soldier in the race war,
and ousts his father as a major power player in the white power structure. The revolutionary is
Martin Luther King Jr. who realizes that true equality would be impossible without economic
equality, attempts to free flows of money capital, and reinvest them back into society.

In the conclusion, I unpack the ending monologue of Blood's a Rover and briefly
examine the characters with first-person accounts: Joan Klein, Marshall Bowen, and Don
Crutchfield in order to call attention to the shifts in psychology in the three novels. The book
ends in an epilogue that, while overblown, is a significant change in form.

Works Cited
Sante, Luc. "Low Lifes." Rev. of American Tabloid, by James Ellroy. New York Review of
Books 11 May 1995. New York Review of Books. Web. 20 Apr. 2011.
Walker, Jonathan. "James Ellroy as Historical Novelist." History Workshop Journal. 53 (2002)
181-204. JSTOR. Web. 27 Nov. 2010.

Spite, Camp, and Gossip-Rags in American Tabloid

The alternative news website The Exiled Online was originally a tabloid set up by
journalists Mark Ames and Matt Taibbi in post-Soviet Russia. After some time of mocking the
oligarchs, journalists, and ex-pats, the KGB got bored with them and kicked them out, but they
still publish online and have recently broken a story that links the Tea Party to corporate
financiers. Their leitmotif of 2011 is this: American culture thrives on spite, malice, and petty
jealousy. Culture critic Eileen Jones' a commentator on the site, she declares that celebrity is a
reminder of the goal of capitalist life: "It's part of our social contract that we should all try to
'make it,' i.e. become rich and/or famous. If we do manage to beat the incredible odds against
us…we get invited to 'The Party.'" The party she has in mind is America as Xanadu, a pleasure
land roped-off from the plebians who can only stand glower spitefully over the bouncer's
shoulder. "It [is] the whole point of becoming rich/famous…to have the waters part before you
everywhere you go" (Jones, "Charlie Sheen and the Pursuit of Happiness"). Journalist Mark
Ames takes the cynicism even further, saying that the spite one feels when watching the rich and
famous drives white middle-class males to vote against their own interests. Looking at the failure
of John Kerry to beat George W. Bush in the 2004 election, he draws on the media
representation of Kerry. To the spiteful, John Kerry's purple hearts were achievements that they
were too cowardly to achieve. The image of him "[riding] up the Mekong, clutching his M-16
like some fucking action hero movie star" was "the life every dead-ender American wishes he
had lived, daydreaming about courage in his wretched cubicle." Kerry's downfall was the picture
of him "wind-surfing like some happy coastal Californian celebrity" (Ames, "We the Spiteful").
Put aside the exaggerations, the ad-hominem attacks, and the mockery, both writers are onto
something. Though Ames' article is more worthwhile, attempt to pinpoint American social

anxiety in a way that explains how we would allow ourselves to protest the government for the
benefit of oligarchs or why we would revel in a chemically-compromised wife-beater's antics.
Early in 2011, a story—"InterContinental 'Killer' Confesses to Castrating Dead
Journalist"—was published in the right-wing tabloid the NY Post. It fits within Rupert Murdoch's
framework. He is the owner of the Post, several tabloids in Australia and the UK and FOX
News. Recall the infamous op-ed cartoon where two police officers gun down a chimpanzee
from two years ago. One of them says, "They'll have to find someone else to write the next
stimulus bill." The cartoonist cites a weird-but-true story about a Connecticut woman who was
attacked by a chimp, likens it to Barack Obama's passing of his stimulus package, and then kills
the chimp with three bullets from quipping white cops. (Stein, "New York Chimp"). It's a racist
image. "InterContinental Killer" is similar in its excess and hatred—both homophobic and
xenophobic. The quotes around "killer" already arouse suspicion, but the order of events posed
by the syntax even more so. The quotes play to a mock journalistic objectivity:
A male model has confessed to brutally torturing his journalist sugar daddy in a Midtown
hotel for more than an hour – and then castrating him with a wine corkscrew – to get rid
of "demons and a virus," law-enforcement sources said yesterday.
"I'm not gay anymore!" accused killer Renato Seabra 20, told investigators he raged to
popular Portuguese fashion columnist Carlos Castro, 65. (Celona et. al)
Homosexuality and spiritual deviance are tenuously linked in these two sentences. There is also
the dubious assertion that homosexuality is a choice. The reference to Castro as a "journalist
sugar daddy" throws any notions of objectivity out the window.
Despite the seeming malice with which this was written, the writers attend to the first
sentence with a degree of craft. Each dash is designed for you to gasp. The castration isn't
coupled with the brutal torture, its separated by dashes. The selective use of quotes is the icing
on the cake—nothing is being made up, law enforcement can prove it. Finally, there's the police

quote that provides "proof", but makes the sentence explode in strangeness. In "The Decay of
Lying," Wilde writes, "How different [political rhetoric is] from the temper of the true liar, with
his frank, fearless statements, his superb irresponsibility, his healthy, natural disdain of proof of
any kind! After all, what is a fine lie? Simply that which is its own evidence" (Wilde 292). There
are a few lies by omission within that short article, but you have to research outside of it to get
the truth. The truth, as usual, is more interesting: Castro was a LGBT activist and, ironically, a
notorious gossip journalist in Portugal (Parascandola et al, "Carlos Castro") The authors made a
choice to make these omissions and it seems that they intended the story to stand on its own by
its strangeness. The authors are trying to create a narrative verisimilitude, the likeness of truth.
They, in Wilde's fashion, craft a little narrative lie that works because it provides its own
evidence.
Why take such a sleazy tabloid story so seriously? Claire Bond Potter, writing about the
gossip surrounding J. Edgar Hoover's sexuality, suggests that it "might permit us to historicize
homophobia as a form of knowledge that is not about LGBTQ people at all. Rather, it needs to
be read for the stories it tells about power in language borrowed from gender and sexuality"
(369). American Tabloid is an attempt to historicize not just homophobia, but other societal fears
and anxieties. It adopts prose that revels in racist, sexist, and homophobic language. It is written
in the way the NY Post article is written, sensationally and with similar omissions and targets.
Unlike the article, the book is intended to be read critically. It performs white masculinity and
requires the reader to question the performance. Take for instance a scene where protagonist Pete
Bondurant quizzes Lenny Sands, a closeted gay comedian about '60s gossip. The quiz is for a
position as a tabloid writer. First, Pete asks where one could find prostitutes on the Sunset Strip
for a hundred dollar bill. Then, he asks, "Suppose I want nigger stuff?" and finally, "Suppose I

want boys?...I know you hate fags, but answer the question" (144-5). The way the questions are
ordered is telling—prostitutes are arranged by race and class. The questions are arranged by what
society considers deviant and they are expected to get consecutively harder to answer. Pete, a
symbol of the power structure (moving freely between Hollywood, the mafia underworld, and
politics) reinforces Lenny's marginalization.
In Susan Sontag's Wildean "Notes on Camp," she lists the tabloid the Enquirer as an
example of a Camp work. Her essay is a series of observations of the Camp sensibility, all
hinting at a certain logical structure. Camp works undermine everything in their crosshairs while
celebrating the flaws they criticize. It's a curious game. Satire is a comic genre aimed to radically
change its subject. It critically assesses an object and amplifies the flaws so as to suggest that
object's illogic. Satire offers pragmatic or moral solutions. Camp, however, identifies and mocks
problems, but celebrates their existence and revels in its ability to do so:
Camp taste is, above all, a mode of enjoyment, of appreciation—not judgment. Camp is
generous. It wants to enjoy. It only seems like malice, cynicism. (Or, if it is cynicism, it's
not a ruthless but a sweet cynicism.) Camp taste doesn't propose that it is in bad taste to
be serious; it doesn't sneer at someone who succeeds in being seriously dramatic. What it
does is to find the success in certain passionate failures. (57)
Camp is based on paradoxes. Is a "ruthless but a sweet cynicism" really cynicism at all? How can
"passionate failures" be successful? It is essential to read American Tabloid with these paradoxes
in mind. "Camp is a vision of the world in terms of style—but a particular kind of style. It is the
love of the exaggerated, the 'off,' of things-being-what-they-are-not" (58). Ellroy's novel is a
Camp parody of crime fiction. He exaggerates everything (the clipped style, the character types,
the violence) and pushes them all towards the breaking point. However, Ellroy differs from
Sontag when she suggests, "It goes without saying that the Camp sensibility is disengaged,
depoliticized—or at least apolitical" (Sontag 56). Ellroy may mock history, but it is in the service

of social critique. In his essay "Notes Against Camp," Andrew Britton writes, "Camp behaviour
is only recognizable as a deviation from an implied norm, and without that norm it would cease
to exist, it would lack definition" (138). He goes further, arguing that Camp is a way of
recuperating social oppression. A Camp performer acknowledges the social constructions (race,
gender/sexual normatives, class) that oppress him and flaunts them to knowing smiles. His
performance requires those constructions to exist.
American Tabloid is a parodic work that mocks, criticizes, and celebrates American
nastiness as seen in private conversation and public policy. It embraces the tabloid perspective
and Camp sensibility while exploring the implications of both. Tabloids feed on spite and revel
in fame. Ellroy attempts to mimic tabloids through style and features them in his plot to criticize
spite and reduce the role of fame in American life. Tabloids lie, omit, and exaggerate. Ellroy
attempts use these traits to get at some emotional truth about America. In the introduction, he
proposes a "reckless verisimilitude" to uncover the truth behind this event—meaning that he
wants to create the likeness of truth to tell the reader what is actually true in American history.
The truth behind the assassination isn't really a conspiracy—it's the atmosphere of hate, anger,
jealousy, and angst that are symptomatic of the social structures we're invested in. These are the
emotions he wants the reader to enjoy and laugh at, and they are the cause of one of the greatest
tragedies in the 20th century.
In Oscar Wilde's Lady Windermere's Fan, Lord Darlington imagines a scenario where he
absconds from dreary London with the much-younger Lady Windermere, and says, "We are all
in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars" (110). Darlington acknowledges his own
unhappiness but revels in (by this point in the narrative) impossible and scandalous fantasy. The
disjunction between the gutter and the stars is the source of this unhappiness. In spite of his

considerable outward charm, manifested in his ability to simultaneously deride and flatter, he's
doomed to unrequited love. While Sontag looks at Camp as a sort of empowerment, there is a
limit that she doesn't observe. The Camp sensibility is a sensibility that allows people to
approach their lives with a great deal of humor. They can laugh at sadness, using an observer's
cynicism and/or romanticism to mock the world around them. A Camp personality can entertain
a group, but they cannot be part of it. All they can do is look. In American Tabloid, the narrator
proposes "It's time to demythologize an era and build a new myth from the gutter to the stars. It's
time to embrace bad men and the price they paid to secretly define their time. Here's to them"
(4). In American Tabloid, Ellroy attempts to close the distance between the gutter and the stars.
He has much in common with Andrew Britton—he diagnoses the oppressive forces that create
this separation and creates a narrative that explores the tragedy of people performing the
oppression they suffer from society.
In a Camp reading of the novel, there needs to be a distinction between two types of
characters—characters with a Camp sensibility and Camp characters. The distinction is
important in recognizing where American Tabloid works as a novel and where it doesn't, or
rather, where it uses parody to achieve ends greater than mere mimicry. One particular
observation from "Notes on Camp" helps distinguish characters with a Camp sensibility: "To
perceive Camp in objects and persons is to understand Being-as-Playing-a-Role. It is the farthest
extension, in sensibility, of the metaphor of life as theater" (Sontag 56). The characters, for the
most part, are similarly invested in performance. A good deal of scenes are set up like theatrical
productions—a character performs and is perceived by an audience. Kemper Boyd, Laura
Hughes, and Lenny Sands perform Camp throughout the novel. Through them, Ellroy explores
the concerns raised by Andrew Britton. Kemper is undone when his performance fails. Laura and

Lenny can only be part of society by performing their oppression. Ellroy is interested in these
performative characters, the social structures they inhabit, and the language they use to define
their status within it.
Sometimes, Ellroy doesn't rise above mere parody. This isn't to dismiss the effort—the
novel is incredibly funny and successfully sends up hard-boiled crime fiction and detective
archetypes: the cool, witty, moral detective (Chandler's Philip Marlowe) the hyper-masculine
hard-boiled cop (Mickey Spillane's Mike Hammer) the femme fatale that kick-started much of
Hollywood's early actresses are present in the novel. All of these are rooted in male fantasy—the
desire to be morally right, dry of wit, and physically strong; to get the perfect woman or, failing
that, prove that this failure is due to feminine evil and exploitation. Kemper superficially
resembles Marlowe, Pete Bondurant is very much Hammer, and Laura and Barbara Jahelka
Lindscott are femme fatales. Kemper and Laura rise above their types. Pete and Barb, however,
are Camp parodies of their types, meaning they are exaggerated in order to point out the type's
inherent silliness. Barb exhibits the "corny flamboyant female-ness" of Jayne Mansfield, Jane
Russell, and others. Pete demonstrates the "exaggerated he-manness of Steve Reeves, Victor
Mature" (Sontag 56). Ellroy uses Pete effectively to achieve his ends—the hard-boiled cop in
American Tabloid's world is a fascist goon who commits terrifying acts of violence. Ellroy,
however, tries to subvert the femme fatale type with Barb and draw her as a three-dimensional
character. He doesn't entirely succeed, only managing to use her to pointedly laugh at the
fantasy.
Kemper is characterized quite similarly to Lord Darlington. He is "a glib dissembler,"
according to Littell (54). He begins the novel as an undercover car thief, entrapping criminals in

an auto-theft ring for the FBI. Despite the police and FBI faking his death in federal custody,
Kemper still finds himself in prison:
The cell looked familiar. He swung his legs off the bunk and got his identity straight.
I'm Special Agent Kemper C. Boyd, FBI, Interstate car theft infiltrator.
I'm not Bob Aiken, freelance car thief.
I'm forty-two years old. I'm a Yale Law School grad. I'm a seventeen-year Bureau
veteran, divorced, with a daughter in college—and a long-time FBI-sanctioned car
booster.
He placed his cell: tier B at the Philly Fed Building.
His head throbbed. His wrists and ankles ached. He tamped down his identity a
last notch.
I've rigged auto-job evidence and skimmed money off of it for years. IS THIS AN
INTERNAL BUREAU ROUST? (20-1)
Sweating it out in a jail cell, Kemper has to get his identity straight, or more accurately, sort it
out aesthetically. First, there's the basic truth, this is his name this is what he does. He is not his
undercover alias. Then more truth: the most nominal facts about his life. Then, in physical pain,
he gets at the essence of his character—he's a paranoid crook and liar. The all-caps last sentence
is seemingly an unnecessary embellishment, but it works stylistically—put a halftone picture of a
man in a jail cell and that sentence and one gets a tabloid cover. The sentence is emphasized
logically, as it is a reaction to the collision of separate identities: Kemper as Bob Aiken, Kemper
as a FBI veteran, and Kemper as a corrupt cop. He reacts to the potential discovery of the third.
After seeing a newspaper article that confirms his alias' "death," he is handed off to J. Edgar
Hoover who briefs him for an undercover job where he is to spy on Robert Kennedy. He is a sort
of interstitial being and much of his action derives from his ability to become different persons
for different groups of people.
In Philip Core's book Camp: The Lie That Tells the Truth, Core proposes a list of rules
that help identify Camp works. Many of them apply to American Tabloid:
•

"CAMP is character limited to context"

•
•
•

"Camp is not necessarily homosexual. Anyone or anything can be camp. But it takes one
to know one"
"CAMP is a disguise that fails"
"CAMP is a lifeboat for men at sea." (Core 80)

In the discussion of Kemper Boyd, these rules apply. Kemper imitates American aristocracy,
civil-rights humanism, and reactionary Anti-Castroism. The disguises fail and reveal genuine
wants and beliefs. There is a moment where Kemper follows John F. Kennedy's campaign: "Jack
knew he'd win. Kemper knew he'd impersonate greatness with the force of an enigma granted
form. This new freedom would make people love him" (275). The awkward pronoun confusion
(who is "he"?) occurs often in the three novels. It is intentional. The trilogy explores identity as a
construct founded on abstractions and events in the novels lead to that construct's implosion.
"Impersonating greatness with the force of an enigma granted form" applies to both Kennedy and
Kemper. For Kennedy, it merely means campaigning as if he had already won the election. For
Kemper, this carries more weight. He wanders between classes and political movements with
panache and part of his appeal with other characters is the aura of mysteriousness he exudes. In
the end, the collision of politics and loyalties eviscerate his aesthetic, revealing a child foolishly
seeking validation from a celebrity.
Sontag writes, "There are only two things essential to camp: a secret within the
personality which one ironically wishes to conceal and to exploit; and a peculiar way of seeing
things, affected by spiritual isolation, but strong enough to impose itself on others through acts or
creations" (82). Before ingratiating himself with the Kennedy family, Kemper goes to his closet
and formulates a new identity. He predicates it on a Wildean thesis: "heroic aristocrats form a
common bond" (24). He ironically distinguishes the Kennedys from the rest of the class.
Heroism, class, and the connection between people who identify with these traits, are all
aesthetic constructs. He builds his identity on similarity: "He liked women, and cheated on his

wife throughout their marriage. Jack Kennedy liked women—and held his marriage vows
expedient and whimsical. Bobby liked his wife and kept her pregnant—insider talk tagged him
faithful." Kemper "likes" women, rather than "loves" them, and he locates this distinction in the
two Kennedys. His dissembling is described further: "Yale for him; Harvard for the Kennedys.
Filthy-rich Irish Catholics; filthy-rich Tennessee Anglicans gone bankrupt. Their family was
large and photogenic; his family was broke and dead. Someday he might tell Jack and Bobby
how his father shot himself and took a month to die." The projection is made very clear, as one
can see in the order of the sentences. The names in the sentence are interchanged, first Kemper
and then the Kennedys. Then the names are inverted. The narration continues, "Southerners and
Boston Irish: both afflicted with incongruous accents. He'd resurrect the drawl it took so long to
lose." Accents are manifestations of class and upbringing and both Southern and Boston Irish
accents suggest working class origins. Part of the mainstream appeal of the Kennedys was the
incongruence between their social position and the accent. To American audiences, they were
proletarians who made it to the top without losing sight of their origins. By resurrecting his
Southern drawl, Kemper can suggest a similar background. He looks into his closet, which is
"twelve feet deep," and comes up with an exterior. "The charcoal worsted for the interview. A
holstered .38 to impress tough guy Bobby. No Yale cuff links—Bobby might possess a
proletarian streak." (24-25). He constructs a masculine identity from a large wardrobe, a detail
that is stereotypically feminine. In the passage, Ellroy writes Boyd as an aesthetic object. Hoover
assigns Kemper to infiltrate the Kennedy clan to ruin John F. Kennedy's presidential campaign.
He impersonates and dissembles. He exploits long-repressed emotional trauma by transforming
his past into an identity. Kemper performs a persona constructed from autobiographical details.
He doesn't reclaim an identity, but rather reappropriates it.

Kemper meets Laura Hughes at an aristocrat's ball. It's a Carlyle bash lousy with
Hollywood celebrities and politicians: singer Maria Callas, actor Peter Lawford, Senator Dean
Acheson, and the entire Kennedy family. Her appearance recalls that of Miss Erlynne's entrance
in the Winderemere's ballroom in Lady Windermere's Fan. In the play, she turns the aristocracy
on its head, exploiting the jealousies of the men and women alike for her own amusement.
"Charming ball it has been! Quite reminds me of old days. And I see that there are just as many
fools in society as there used to be. So pleased to find nothing has altered!" (74) she announces
as the party winds down. Laura's entrance at the ball resembles Erlynne's, just rapidly condensed.
She inspires several different reactions, from spite to lust, and she acts with party-crashing
aplomb: "She made a butler pet her coat. She insisted that Leonard Bernstein try it on. She
mambo-stepped through the crowd and snatched Joe Kennedy's drink." Joe Kennedy gives "her a
small, gift-wrapped box. The woman tucked it in her purse. Three Kennedy sisters walked off in
a huff." To top it off, "Peter Lawford ogled the woman. Bennet Cerf slid by and peeked down her
dress" (113). It's amusing, but is seems like the "corny flamboyant female-ness" that Sontag
identifies as an element of Camp (Sontag 56). There is a quality of classic cinema, the femme
fatale, namely Hitchcockian thrillers and film noir melodramas, where, as soon as an impossibly
sexy woman smiles at the male protagonist, the movie slows down to a halt. One knows just how
doomed the male protagonist is. There's also the fantastical element that, somewhere, a man can
look at the other end of the party floor and lock eyes with that perfect, sexy woman. Ellroy
subverts this through an ironic distance. The aristocrats are the audience in this case, and they
(particularly the men) act as people in a movie theater would act.
Laura is the daughter of Gloria Swanson and Joseph Kennedy, a coupling that somehow
eluded the tabloids. Swanson, unwilling to risk an abortion, keeps Laura. Laura says:

"My movie-star mom disowned me, but my father enjoys flaunting me in front of his
legitimate family once a year. The boys like me because I’m provocative, and they think
I’m nifty because they can’t fuck me, because I’m their half-sister. The girls hate me
because I’m a coded message from their father that says men can fuck around, but
women can’t. Do you get the picture, Mr. Boyd?"
She has an acute awareness of the Kennedy family due to her position, technically inside the
clique, but is forbidden real entry. Joseph Kennedy helped her way through life out of real
feeling that defies his character. She says, "My father is evil and grasping…I hate everything
about him except the money he gives me and the fact that he would probably destroy anybody
who tried to hurt me as well" (149). Because of her dependence, her revenge can only be petty.
First, she takes the name Hughes after Howard Hughes, who was Joseph Kennedy's biggest
competitor in Hollywood in the '30s. At the party, Joseph Kennedy gives Laura a gift. It's an
emerald broach wrapped in thousand-dollar bill. She gives the broach to a homeless man, much
to Kemper's amusement. "Aren't the Kennedy's vulgar?" she wryly asks (115). Her existence fits
in with the aesthetic of the novel: she's the angry offspring of politics and Hollywood. She
combats the sadness of her life with wit. She doesn't flaunt class so much as flaunt her existence,
which is only a mild insult to the Kennedy family. When Kemper first enters her apartment, he
notices that the apartment was decorated to resemble the Kennedy's suite (147). Laura's an
interesting foil for Kemper. She was born into the world of celebrity as a bastard child. She can't
get out, so she flaunts her family's excess satirically. The family-less Kemper lies his way into
the Kennedy clan through impersonation and by embracing his own traumas.
With Laura, Ellroy subverts his own need to make women into redemptive objects. Any
redemption she offers would be small and fleeting. She's too involved in the world that created
and is destroying Kemper to suggest any sort of future. In a key scene, Kemper is sitting in a
bugged hotel room, brainstorming a way to plan the Bay of Pigs operation under FBI

surveillance. He puts two TVs together, sees John Kennedy on one and Marilyn Monroe on the
other and snaps "to the ultimate tweak-Hoover embellishment." He creates "Voyeur/Wiretap
Heaven. Hoover would cream his jeans and maybe even spawn some crazy myth" (303). It's a
funny little aside, but he unwittingly parodies Laura's origins as a bastard child of a dalliance
between a Kennedy and a Hollywood starlet. At this point of the novel, his relationship with
Laura is serious and he is aware of that such a scandalous relationship wreaked such hell on her
life. Later, J. Edgar Hoover (a sort of Greek chorus) sends Kemper a letter, which reads:
Three-fold congratulations.
One your recent evasion tactics were superbly efficacious. Two your Marilyn
Monroe aside had me going for quite some time. What a myth you have created! With
luck, it will enter what Hush-Hush would call the "Peephole Pantheon!"
Thirdly, bravo for your appointment as roving Justice Department counsel. My
contacts tell me you'll be concentrating on voting rights abuse in the south. How fitting!
Now you'll be able to champion left-inclined negroes with the same tenacity that you
embrace right-wing Cubans!
I think you've found your métier. I would be hard-pressed to conceive of work
more suitable for a man with such a lenient code of loyalty. (342)
Hoover, obviously, was not spited by Kemper's tactic. Following the letter, Kemper meets with
Laura. He had been asked to break off his relationship by Robert Kennedy, but sees her secretly.
When he gets there, Laura is crying and informs him that the Kennedy family gave her a check
for three million dollars on the condition that she never contacts her family again. He suggests,
"You could rip it up," to which Laura replies "Would you?" Finally she gives him an ultimatum,
the one that in another book (perhaps one of Ellroy's earlier novels) would be a choice akin to
getting on a life-raft or staying on the sinking Titanic: "Them or me?" He chooses the Kennedy
family. Kemper is geared towards glamour and power at the cost of self-identity. Laura's own
dissemblage has collapsed: "her mascara was running. Her whole face looked off-kilter" (343).
She's an aesthetic failure, vulnerable and positively unglamorous. For Kemper, leaving Laura is
the obvious decision. Laura's character fits in within aesthetic of the novel, not just the campy

trappings of crime and noir novels.
The destruction of Kemper's disguise occurs near the end of the novel. It reads like a
joke. Much ado is made about Kemper's ability to infiltrate high society, but we learn that it
never really worked. Pete, betrayed by John F. Kennedy's indecision on the Bay of Pigs invasion,
creates a scandal by entrapping the President with his love-interest Barb in a bugged hotel room.
Kemper is brought up. The post-coital transcript reads:
JFK: [Kemper] makes me uncomfortable because his one great regret is that he's not a
Kennedy, which is quite a tough regret to respect. He's been dealing with some of those
lowlife exiles for Bobby's Study Group [an investigation into the Bay of Pigs fiasco] and
I think in some ways he's no better than they are. He just went to Yale Law School,
latched onto me and proved himself useful…
Kemper's no Peter Lawford, I'll say that for him. Peter's got no soul to sell, and Kemper
sold his at a pretty steep price and didn't even know it…I can’t go into details, but he
threw over the woman he was engaged to curry favor with me and my family. You see,
he came from money, but his father lost it all and killed himself. He’s living out some
unsavory fantasy with me, and once you recognize it, the man becomes hard to take.
(465-6).
Despite the acrimony between the Kennedy family and Laura, Kennedy regards Laura as some
sort of redemptive force in Kemper's life. For Kennedy, Laura stands on a pedestal and he mocks
Kemper for his failure to recognize this reality and for Kemper's decision to engage in an
aristocratic fantasy with the Kennedy family. The text does not support Kennedy's argument.
After all, Kemper broke from Laura for aesthetic reasons—the fantasy of a future with her
crumbled, revealing an unappealing reality.
Barb differs from Laura in that the deconstruction of archetypes is significantly more
limited. She is an archetypal foil for Pete, which is appropriate as Pete is an archetype himself.
Pete is the violent, hard-boiled cop. Ellroy simply places Pete in the real world and imagines who
that character would be: a simplistic, fascist goon. Ellroy, in the LA Quartet series and in
Brown's Requiem, has a tendency to complicate his protagonists to the point where one wonders

why they don't commit suicide halfway through the novels. Pete is weirdly uncomplicated. While
Kemper Boyd at least creates personas to compensate for his shallow personality and while Ward
Littell is driven by idealism and revenge, Pete's motivations are simple. He begins the novel as
bored and greedy, then devotes himself to imperial politics, and finally falls in simple "love."
Pete's falling in love may be one of the most stupid things in the book, for reasons intentional
and unintentional. Even though Ellroy casts women as these savior types, the attraction men have
towards them is because of either competence or shared trauma. This is exemplified interestingly
in the Kemper-Laura relationship. Pete and Barb are attracted to the exaggeration of one
another's sexuality. Their relationship is an outright parody of the worst of genre conventions and
it's depicted appropriately Camp.
The physical description of the main characters are epitomized in one salient detail.
Kemper always wears a suit, Ward Littell always wears glasses, and Pete rubs the knuckles of his
fists. In this, he's the condensation of masculinity and violence of Ellroy's America condensed in
one grotesque cartoon. In the book's first few pages, this point is made clear. Ellroy summarises
Pete's own personal history:
June '52. L.A. County Deputy Sheriff Pete Bondurant—night watch commander at the
San Dimas Substation. That one shitty night: a nigger rape-o at large, the drunk tank
packed with howling juiceheads.
This wino gave him grief. "I know you, tough guy. You kill innocent women and
your own—"
He beat the man to death barefisted.
The Sheriff's hushed it up. An eyeball witness squealed to the Feds. The L.A.
agent-in-charge tagged Joe Wino "Joe Civil Rights Victim."
Two agents leaned on him: Kemper Boyd and Ward J. Littell. Howard Hughes
saw his picture in the paper and sensed strongarm potential. Hughes got the beef quashed
and offered him a job: fixer, pimp, dope conduit. (8)
Pete kills the drunkard, presumably black (considering the "Civil Rights Victim" tag), not
because of a power trip or a race hit, because the man has access to Pete's past. Later on, its

revealed that L.A. gangster Mickey Cohen enlisted Pete to kill a man who robbed one of his
poker games, as well as whoever else was in the house he was with. He ends up killing the man,
as well as the man's 56-year-old mother, a pregnant woman, and his own brother. The drunkard
is made a cause-celebre for civil rights (which he is, after all a man beaten to death in police
custody by a cop is a civil rights abuse) and the FBI investigates. It's all silenced—money wins
in the end. Someone leaks the information to Pete's parents, and they commit suicide. Like
everything else in the novel, the three spheres of organized crime, politics, and Hollywood
converge, and in this movement, there's a real and personal cost.
When Howard Hughes buys Hush-Hush, he becomes the "story verifier," a job that is just
a further extension of Pete's fists. Howard Hughes explicitly co-opts Hush-Hush to smear the
Kennedy's and promote his own crack-pot, right-wing values. There are multiple points in the
novel where we see Pete work his knuckles—like Kemper's suits, it is Pete's defining detail.
There are no further glimpses into his past. His actions are always immediate and violent. Unlike
Littell, who is haunted by every one of his violent acts, or Kemper who can readapt his past into
performance, Pete simply plows through the present. Pete explains, "Story verification' means
'Don't sue the magazine or I'll hurt you'" (10). Pete's job is to repress dissent—anybody who can
provide the facts that contradict a stories verisimilitude is threatened with violence.
Aside from verifying stories for Hughes, he eradicates snitches for Jimmy Hoffa and
extorts unfaithful husbands. After we learn about the obliteration of Pete's family, Pete and his
Hush-Hush co-worker and girlfriend Gail Hendee work an extortion case. They are hired by a
rich woman to entrap her husband in a moment of infidelity so she can swing her divorce in her
favor. In the scene, we get a performance much like Kemper Boyd's own. As Pete watches the
seduction in a bar, "Helpless Gail searched her purse for matches. Helpful Walt flicked his

lighter and smiled. Sexy Walt was dripping scalp flakes all over the back of his jacket. Gail
smiled. Sexy Walt smiled. Well-dressed Walt wore white socks with a three-piece chalk-stripe
suit." While Walt may find himself genuinely sexy, he is described with comic irony. Gail,
however, is simply performing. Gail "touched Walt's arm. Her guilty heart showed plain—except
for the money she hates it." Already, we see that despite the inherent comedy in this there is
some sadness. Yet it goes on. Pete "heard Lonely Walt pitch some boo-hoo: my wife and kids
don't know a man has certain needs. Gail said, Why'd you have seven kids then? Walt said, It
keeps my wife at home, where a woman belongs." They finally go at it, "There: Gail and Walter
P. Kinnard fucking. In the missionary style, with their heads close together—courtroom adultery
evidence. Walt was loving it. Gail was feigning ecstasy and picking at a hangnail." Pete then
breaks down the door. "One, two, three—flashbulb blips Tommy-gun fast. The whole goddamn
room went glare bright. Kinnard shrieked and pulled out dishrag limp. Gail tumbled off the bed
and ran for the bathroom. Sexy buck-naked Walt: 5'9", 210, pudgy." Pete roughs up Walt, picks
him up by the neck, and then gives him his wife's demands for their upcoming divorce. Walt
"popped spit-bubbles. Pete admired his color: half shock-blue, half cardiac-red." Finally, "Gail
walked out of a steam cloud. Her 'I can't take much more of this' was no big surprise" (13-4).
This scene, while simply funny in Walt's pathetic display, Gail's seeming apathy, and Pete's
extreme behavior—there's a bored, workmanlike quality to the whole episode (the countdowns,
the picking at hangnail), which showcases Ellroy's sensibility for better and for worse. The free
and indirect perspective privileges Pete. It's funny because he thinks it's funny. Whatever pain
Gail or even Walt experience is promptly written off in the narrative voice. The voice
acknowledges it, but for Pete and Gail, it's all par for the course. The only people that are
performing in the situation are the men. Gail goes through the motions, and in the narrative, is

clearly bored, exhausted, and guilty.
The voice always privileges Pete and always mocks characters' perceived weakness and
sadness. The narrative voice apes a sexist, racist, homophobic, and reactionary, bully. These
qualities are more suppressed here than in the sequels, namely The Cold Six Thousand, where it's
exaggerated to maximum discomfort. Not long after the Walter Kinnard extortion, Hughes
presents Pete with tabloid headlines, hoping to take the paper to a new direction. "Pete slouched
in a chair and thumbed last week's issue. On the cover: 'Migrant Workers Carry VD Plague!' A
co-feature: 'Hollywood Ranch Market—Homo Heaven.'" Hughes tells him to get Sol Maltzman,
an embittered blacklisted Communist, to write "Negroes: Overbreeding Creates TB Epidemic".
To this, Pete replies, "That sounds pretty far-fetched." Hughes responds, "Facts can be bent to
conform to any thesis" (39). The headlines are patently ridiculous, though unnerving. First there's
the inane headlines and Hughes' non-answer. Pete's says, "Will I get you some more dope and
disposable hypos? Yes, sir!" and Hughes' motion towards the TV to watch kids cartoons. In
doing this, the prose favors Pete's point-of-view. Pete reduces a reactionary to an addict, then to a
child. While the humor is a little too much, there's a subtle jab at tabloid culture. Tabloids favor
the celebrity. Is there anything more unglamorous to a presumably white 1950s audience than
migrant workers, a supermarket notorious for its dirtiness, and African-Americans?
Pete tracks Kemper to a hotel, and from there discovers Kemper and Ward Littell
bugging an escort's house. J. Edgar Hoover gives Kemper her name to pass on to John F.
Kennedy. Pete, seeing "$$$'s—like a 3-across slot-machine jackpot," has private investigator
Fred Turentine piggy-back on the wiretap. Hughes, gladly, funds the operation. They think they
get the story of the century—Senator Kennedy's back giving out after six-minutes with a hooker.
To their disappointment, Gail writes "Senator John F. Kennedy is rather a tenuously tumescent

tomcat, with a tantalizingly trenchant taste for those finely-furred and felicitous felines who find
him fantastically fetching themselves!" She's criticized by the narrative voice for not being
vicious enough: Gail "plays it half-assed" (83). John F. Kennedy is attractive and he likes
attractive women, who find him attractive in turn. This is one of the few moments of actual
human decency in the novel. Unlike Hughes, whose paranoia can only produce vague,
propagandist, headlines, she creates something that is so clever and purposeful in its awfulness
that it is impossible to take seriously. In the action of the novel, though, her decision to play it
safe and campy is partly an issue of individual respect. "[John F. Kennedy] was nice, though. He
never said, 'Honey, let's get a divorce racket going,'" she tells Pete (82). However, after federal
agents confiscate all outgoing issues of the magazine and raid the offices, it is suggested that her
actions are mostly vengeful. Earlier, her friend Sol Maltzman, a black-listed Communist,
committed suicide after Pete fired him and robbed him of his files. The files exposed Richard
Nixon and the House Un-American Activists Committee for corruption.
The reader is reminded of Pete's loneliness over the course of the novel with an
appropriately Neanderthal leitmotif: "Big Pete wants a woman. Extortion experience preferred,
but not necessary." Lenny writes to Hughes about a "gorgeous redhead singer Barb Jahelka" who
was arrested for extortion. She first appears in the novel on stage performing for her junkie
husband's terrible band. Once again, there are two audiences, the protagonist and the public.
"Barb Jahelka slinked up to the mike. Barb oozed healthy pulchritude. Barb was no show-biz
subspecies junkie" (444). It's almost as if Ellroy ran out of ways to describe a woman's sexuality.
It's hard to imagine a word like "pulchritude" (an antiquated word for "beauty") coming out of
Pete's mouth. The last sentence, misogynistic as it is, mirrors Pete's desperation and surprise. He
continues watching both her and the audience. She's sexualized throughout the performance.

"Dig that tight, low cut gown. Dig the heels that put her over six feet." Continued, "Barb sang
weak-voiced and monotonous. Barb put out unique gyrations flat-out concurrent. She kicked her
shoes off. She thrust her hips out and popped seams down her leg…Pete chain-smoked. Barb lost
a breast and tucked it back before the Twist fiends noticed. Pete smiled-oops!-dazzling" (443-4).
What Pete sees is an exaggerated and parodic femininity. She's his female equivalent in raw
physicality and hyper-sexuality.
The description is embarrassing, but considering how Ellroy's prose allows for Laura
Hughes and Gail Hendee to live as characters, it is supposed to be embarrassing. Ellroy then
presents a litany of her traumas—her sister was raped by four men and an addict tight with the
mafia had three of those men eradicated in exchange for marriage. Her backstory is intended to
give her depth, to at least subvert expectations of the over-sexed, freewheeling archetype in the
crime genre. The disjunction between her behavior and her past gives the sense that she was a
comic figure first and a three-dimensional character second. She serves to undercut the male
fantasy at play—Pete looks across the room and sees his version of a perfect woman. However,
she performs this very version. This is clear when Littell and Pete brace Barb for the Kennedy
shakedown:
Littell smiled, "If you meet President Kennedy and wanted to impress him, how would
you act?
Barb blew perfect smoke rings. "I'd act profane and funny."
"What would you wear?"
"Flat heels."
"Why?"
"Men like women they can look down to."
Littell laughed. (451)
Barb knowingly and willfully participates in masculine fantasy, where gender roles ultimately
comes down to "Men like women they can look down to." Through her romance with Pete, she
serves a role in deconstructing this fantasy.

The romance is played for laughs—Pete transforms into a kid with an impossible
celebrity crush. After Pete voyeurs on Barb and John F. Kennedy, Pete "studies the foldout [of
Barb] for the ten millionth time." He "called Barb once a week. He tossed out little love
checks—You don't really dig Jack, do you?" It's the question a schoolgirl asks a paparazzi photo
of her favorite celebrity walking hand-in-hand with a significant other ("You don't really love her
do you?" to which the imaginary reply is "No, darling. I love you, it's just that my agent…").
Barb denies any affection for the President, but admires his allure. Barb is then filtered through
the narrative voice: "Jack was just a six-minute erection and some chuckles". As Pete chats with
her on the phone, he tries to reconcile the Bay of Pigs fallout. He draws "little hearts and arrows,
ad fucking infinitum" (469). The image is comic, the apathetic "story-verifier" Pete is
transformed into a drooling fan. Ellroy cements the joke when Pete has sex with Barb. It begins,
"Pete tripped out of his pants. Barb pulled off her Twist gown. Loose rhinestones hit the floor—
Pete gouged his feet on them. Barb kicked his holster under the bed. Pete pulled the covers
down. The stale perfume stuck to the sheets made him sneeze." Both of their sexualities are
aesthetic. The gown is cheap, the perfume is stale. The fact that Pete has his holster in the first
place is a detail that plays to cop fantasy. Finally, "He came without her even touching him. He
shook and sobbed and kept tasting her." Pete touches Barb, but Barb never touches him. Ellroy
takes the male fantasy of the hyper-masculine cop and the hyper-feminine femme fatale and
demolishes it in the first sentence. "She spasmed. She bit through the sheets. She lulled and
spasmed, lulled and spasmed, lulled and spasmed" (494). The sex scene, the only one in the
novel, is parody but there's something fairly dark occurring. If this was a mere joke on male
fantasy, then Ellroy could have focused on his premature orgasm and his sobbing. Instead, the
narrative voice focuses on and exaggerates her orgasm. There is a disjunction between what is

going on in the scene and what is going on in the text.
The limits of camp are embodied in Lenny Sands, the gay, Jewish comedian who slums
in Teamster junkets. Lenny Sands may be the most tragic character in the novel. Performing in
front of Hoffa's Teamster Union, Lenny Sands camps. Looking at his jokes, one can see a hack
routine done quite cleverly. However, there are two audiences, the Teamsters and Littell, and we
see the routine from the latter's perspective. "A stripper brought ice refills by—Littell caught a
breast in the face. Lenny said, “It sure is hot up here!” The stripper hopped on stage and dropped
ice cubes down his pants. The audience howled; the man beside Littell squealed and spat
bourbon" (97). Lenny turns himself into an androgynous entity, by way of a symbolic castration.
The stripper's sexual suggestion is over the top and Lenny responds in kind by doing a spit-take
and mugging. His homosexuality isn't hidden. He performs the social image of a gay man and it's
well-recieved. To the teamsters in the bar, they don't know that he is gay, just that he performs
gayness quite well. As far as Camp is concerned, Lenny's performance is especially layered:
Lenny made ecstatic faces. Lenny shook his trouser legs until the ice
dropped out.
The crowd wolf-whistled and shrieked and thumped their tables-The stripper
ducked behind a curtain. (98)
Like Kemper, Lenny imitates the Kennedys. However, it isn't nearly as involved as Kemper's
dissemblage. Rather Lenny imitates the exteriority of Bobby Kennedy, appropriating the
incongruous Boston accent and pushes it into "soprano range":
“Now you listen to me, Mr. Hoffa! You quit associating with those nasty gangsters and
nasty truck drivers and snitch off all your friends or I’ll tell my daddy on you!”
The room rocked. The room rolled. Foot stomps had the floor shaking.
“Mr. Hoffa, you’re a no-goodnik and a nasty man! You quit trying to unionize my six
children or I’ll tell my daddy and my big brother Jack on you! You be nice or I’ll tell my
daddy to buy your union and make all your nasty truck drivers servants at our family
compound in Hyannis Port!”

The room roared. Littell felt queasy-hot and lightheaded. (98)
Hoffa's teamsters don't even pretend to hide the fact that they're bad people. "Nasty," with a
falsetto, is a compliment. The jokes play towards their spite and politics. The insults themselves
don't really make any logical sense. Bobby Kennedy, in the routine, is a stereotypical gay man
with six kids. He's a rich and powerful enforcer who resorts to squealing and ironic flirtation to
get what he wants. It doesn't hurt because it doesn't make sense. Like tabloids, it revels in the
selected details, logical or not. Lenny's skit is designed to maximize enjoyment. To enjoy
something is to validate it. He camps to the audience. Through Littell, however, we view it from
an outsider's point of view and from there, we only see the performance and the reaction it gets
from the audience. Most importantly, appreciation of this sort of thing from this point of view is
theoretical. Littell is enamored by Bobby Kennedy, knows the true evil of Lenny's audience, and
has some background on Lenny's closeted homosexuality. In this moment on stage, a man
displaying aspects of his personality they can be torn down. Lenny's not empowered by camp, as
Sontag imagined in her essay.
Throughout the novel, Lenny is Shanghaied by the oppressive forces in the novel.
Andrew Britton writes, "in a contemporary context, gay camp seems little more than a kind of
anaesthetic, allowing one to remain inside oppressive relations while enjoying the illusory
confidence that one is flouting them." (139) This sentiment is taken to an extreme. First, Lenny
minstrels for the mob and gets a healthy paycheck in return. Then, he sees feared mobster Tony
"Icepick" Iannone in a gay bar. Iannone chases him, fearing that his own sexuality isn't revealed,
and Lenny kills Iannone in self-defense. Littell blackmails him to work for the FBI. There's a
scene where both Littell and Kemper lean on Lenny in his apartment. Kemper forces Littell to
beat Lenny. Lenny plants his tongue in his cheek and mocks them, which is another way of

egging them on. Kemper tells Lenny, "You're a homosexual and a murderer. You have no rights.
You're a Federal informant, and the Chicago FBI owns you." They threaten him with an autopsy
photo of Iannone's lover, who the mob killed in retribution for Iannone's death. For them, any
gay man would do, and they dispatch Iannone's lover monstrously—castrating him and stuffing
the genitals into his mouth. Lenny's immediate reaction to the photo is to perform. He shudders,
then puts on "an instant rough-trade face" and "smiles this preposterous pseudo-tough-guy smile"
(132). His camp impulse is to mock Littell and Kemper. He imitates Kemper's tough-cop routine
and is rewarded with a punch to the face. After more painful grilling, Lenny "sounded calm. He
sounded like an actor who just figured out his role" (133). Littell gives Lenny his next
assignment, to which Lenny responds, "'Oh yes, yes, Mr. Littell, sir'—arch-ugly-faggot
inflected" (134). He minstrels a sarcastic agreement and resigns himself to slavery. Once again,
the narrative voice intrudes. What does "arch-ugly-faggot inflected" sound like? Could such an
inflection be determined from his response, which is composed of monosyllabic words? The
narrative voice determines the inflection to cement his place in society.
Lenny later writes for Hush-Hush under the pseudonym Peerless Politicopundit. Unlike
Gail Hendee, who wrote harmless articles, Lenny writes propaganda. He is the mouthpiece of the
misguided American invasion of Cuba, which in the novel, is a coalition of the CIA, Ku Klux
Klan, and anti-Castro Cuban expatriates funded by heroin distribution in black Miami
neighborhoods. He produces two articles, one during the invasion's planning phase and one after
it's failure. The articles are written in the Hush-Hush style—excited and alliterative. His articles,
unlike Hendee's articles, are satirical. The first begins with a summary of Cuban history:
Castro ousted the democratically-elected anti-Communist Cuban Premier Fulgencio
Batista last New Year's day. The bombastic bushy-beard beatnik bard promised land
reforms, social justice and pickled plantains on every plate—the standard stipends of
welfare-waffled Commie commissars. He took over a small bastion of freedom 90 miles

off U.S. shores, pathologically picked the pockets of patriotic patriarchs, nauseously
"nationalized" U.S.-owned hotel-casinos, fried the friendly fragrant fields of the United
Fruit Company and generally absconded with astronomical amounts of America's most
peon-protecting, Commie-constraining export: money!!!
Lenny toes an ironic right-wing line. He insults Castro's appearance, but doesn't criticize his
promises. He then mimics the language of Hughes, Hoover, and the mafia to the point of
ridiculousness: a free society has patriarchs and peons and an economy controlled by a foreign
superpower. Lenny continues, "Peons passionately protected by America's altruistically-altered
egalitarian economy are now welfare-wilted, pauper-periled Red Recidivists grubbing for
Commie compensation" (249). Capitalism as an "altruistically-altered egalitarian economy"
makes no positive sense. If an economy were egalitarian, why would it have to be adjusted?
Hoover buys the story, "it was, of course, far-fetched, but subtract the purple prose and what
remains is politically substantive" (250). The second article, published a week after the failed
invasion, is titled "Cowardly Castrato Castro Ousted!" Sands writes, "Call the Bay of Pigs the
Caribbean Carthage; Playa Giron the patriotic Parthenon. Call Castro debilitated and
depilatoried—word has it that he shaved off his beard to dodge the deep and dangerous depths of
revenge-seeker recognition!" (406). The article's irony is only in the context—Sands plays the
story completely straight, which may be the greatest insult he could make. In his story, the
invasion emasculates Castro, transforming him into a beardless castrato. Instead, it does the
opposite. The final insult is given at the end, where he accuses Castro for selling heroin in black
Miami neighborhoods and reports the deaths of "scores of Negro drug addicts" (407), which calls
attention to the funding of the anti-Castro movement. Hoover is livid: "My contact mentioned the
curiously prophetic (if historically inaccurate) Hush-Hush piece. I told him that it was merely
one of life's odd coincidences, an explanation that seemed to satisfy him". He continues, "Hush-

Hush should not publish science fiction, unless it's directly in our best interest" (407-8). The
reader is required to imagine Lenny's delight, as it's censored by Hoover.
Throughout the novel, Lenny mocks the power structures he's trapped in. He is not only
repressed by them but is coerced into being their mouthpiece. Any expression of dissent is either
physically beaten down by authority figures or has to be filtered through the language of power.
Characters constantly misread him. At the end of the novel, he finally acts. Kemper, thinking that
Lenny set up the Kennedy shakedown with Pete, he goes to Laura's apartment and finds Lenny,
Laura, and his daughter drinking. He pulls a gun and aims it at Lenny. Lenny "flicked his
cigarette at him and smiled. The tip burned his face. Ashes singed his suitcoat. He steadied his
aim and pulled the trigger. The gun jammed. Lenny smiled" (502). Kemper's burnt face and
singed suitcoat are significant wounds—he is described primarily by his looks. Kemper runs.
Lenny finally has agency and he breaks into the Carlyle suite and ruins Pete's shakedown
attempt. We learn about it first through Freddy Otash, Pete's surveillance partner and then
through an anonymous Justice Department agent. Kemper is handcuffed and one of Kennedy's
men tells him:
"Lenny Sands killed himself in New York City last night. He rented a cheap hotel room,
slashed his wrists and wrote 'I am a homosexual' in blood on the wall above the bed. The
sink and toilet were filled with burned-up tape fragments obviously taken off a bug
installed in the Kennedy family's suite at the Carlyle Hotel" (508).
Lenny's genuine attempt to save Kennedy's presidency and his suicide are filtered through an
anonymous Justice Department agent. Lenny takes his own life in his only moment of freedom
(one can imagine what Pete would have done to him had he been alive) and in that moment
expresses himself genuinely. It's ultimately meaningless—because of the failed shakedown and
the Bay of Pigs, the Mafia realizes that it has no leverage over the Kennedy family and coerces
Pete and Kemper into plotting Kennedy's assassination. Before the assassination, there is a

transcript of a conversation between John Rosselli and Sam Giancana, two mobsters. John
Rosselli says, "And it turned out Lenny was a faggot. Can you believe it?" Giancana, than says,
"Who would have believed it?" Rosselli responds "He was Jewish, Mo. The Jewish race has a
higher percentage of homos than regular white people" (511). They then change topics,
dismissing Lenny's existence. They not only exclude him within the power center of the mafia,
but from the white race as well.
Earlier in the novel, Laura and Kemper talk about Lenny. She tells him, "Lenny knows
bad people, and bad people can make you say things you don't want to" (149). What is so
interesting about the narrative voice in American Tabloid is that in parodying hard-boiled prose
and tabloid writing, Ellroy creates a language of power that hectors, excludes, and forces . Lenny
Sands is the most obvious example of this. There is almost always a disjunction between what is
physically going on in a scene and the way that information is relayed back to us. The voice
insists on maintaining male fantasy and anxiety in the face of the novel's reality. It comes to no
surprise that the character favored in the text is the most repellent. Pete is the only character who
goes largely unscathed by the narrative voice, even though he inflicts the most violence. He is
only insulted when he draws little hearts and arrows on a file. At the end of the novel, the day of
John F. Kennedy's assassination, Pete is at a bar watching Barb (now his wife) sing "Unchained
Melody." He is preparing himself for when Barb sees Kennedy's corpse and realizes that she was
complicit in the killing. As Kennedy's caravan passes, the patrons and staff vacate the bar. "He
watched her. He made up his own words. She held him with her eyes and her mouth. The roar
did a long slow fade. He braced himself for this big fucking scream" (576). Pete, watching his
wife sing, puts words in her mouth. The book ends in a brief moment of silence.

Works Cited
Ames, Mark. "We, The Spiteful." The Exiled. 22 Jan. 2011. Web. 22 Jan. 2011.
Britton, Andrew. "For Interpretation: Notes Against Camp." 1978/79. Camp: Queer Aesthetics
and the Performing Subject: a Reader. Ed. Fabio Cleto. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan, 1999. 136-42. Print.
Celona, Larry, John Doyle, and Don Kaplan. "InterContinental 'killer' Confesses to Castrating
Dead Journalist" New York Post. New York Post, 10 Jan. 2011. Web. 30 Jan. 2011.
Core, Philip. "From Camp: The Lie That Tells the Truth." 1984. Camp: Queer Aesthetics and the
Performing Subject : a Reader. Ed. Fabio Cleto. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan,
1999. 80-86. Print.
Ellroy, James. American Tabloid. New York: Vintage, 2001. Print.
Jones, Eileen. "Charlie Sheen and the Pursuit of Happiness." The Exiled. 29 Jan. 2011. Web. 2
Feb. 2011.
Parascandola, Rocco, Erica Pearson, and Jonathan Lemire. "Carlos Castro, Portuguese Journalist
and Male Model Renato Seabra Fought over Money: Cops - New York Daily News." NY Daily
News. NY Daily News, 7 Jan. 2011. Web. 2 Feb. 2011.
Potter, Claire Bond. “Queer Hoover: Sex, Lies, and Political History”. Journal of the History of
Sexuality. 15.3 (2006). 355-381. JSTOR. 27 Sep. 2010.
Sontag, Susan. "Notes on Camp." 1964. Camp: Queer Aesthetics and the Performing Subject : a
Reader. Ed. Fabio Cleto. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 1999. 53-66. Print.
Stein, Sam. "New York Post Chimp Cartoon Compares Stimulus Author To Dead Primate." The
Huffington Post. 18 Feb. 2009. Web. 22 Jan. 2011.
Wilde, Oscar. Lady Windermere's Fan. 29th ed. London: Methuen &, 1951. Print.

Wilde, Oscar. "The Decay of Lying." Ed. Richard Ellmann. The Artist as Critic: Critical
Writings of Oscar Wilde. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1969. 290-320. Print.

Schizophrenia, Repression, and Revolution
in The Cold Six Thousand
Ellroy's camp parody reaches its limits in The Cold Six Thousand. It begins moments
after the JFK assassination as Wayne Tedrow Jr. flies into Dallas. His mission is summed up in
two sentences of blunt prose: "They sent him to Dallas to kill a nigger pimp named Wendell
Durfee. He wasn't sure he could do it" (3). A stewardess flirts with him once she recognizes his
name, or rather, that of his father, who is a corrupt union boss, Klan leader, right-wing
propagandist, socialite, and friend of J. Edgar Hoover. He turns her down when she calls him
Junior. After Wayne lands, he walks through the terminal. "Schoolgirls blocked the gate. One
girl cried. One girl fucked with prayer beads…People walked past him. They looked suckerpunched. Red eyes. Boo-hoo. Women with Kleenex" (4). The mourners are mocked—after all,
someone counting the beads on a rosary isn't "fucking" with them. The writing clues you in on
what to expect in the rest of the novel. Sentences, for the most part, are simplified to subjectpredicate constructions. They are taken to the breaking point. The word picture is shortened to
"pix," for instance. Another moment is when the narrative summarizes Wayne's alienation from
his mother: "'Don't fight in silly wars.' She said, 'Don't hate like Wayne Senior.' He cut her off.
Binding/permanent/4-ever" (7). The purpose of that final "word" is to highlight the stupidity of
his decision, encapsulated in child-speak redundancy.
This is merely one of the The Cold Six Thousand's problems. The themes and style of the
first novel are amplified, but the results are often maddening. Numerous critics have taken issue
with the prose. The short sentences may have an engrossing rhythm, but there's always
something that's too crude that distracts from the reading experience. The Cold Six Thousand
suffers from the law of diminishing returns. Much of it may be due to a misunderstanding of the
previous novel's strengths and weaknesses. The clipped style, for the most part, works in

American Tabloid and Ellroy attempts to further shorten the prose to the point where they
resemble hasty text messages. He also takes the themes of repression and identity to a grander
level than the previous novel. On a plot level, the characters are actively involved in the
repression of the civil rights movement and emerging white hate groups. The movement between
the state and these movements takes a significant toll on the characters. Protagonists have to
repress characteristics of their identities: past histories, sexualities, political and moral leanings.
They are lost in a search for a stable self amidst the chaos of the book's events. Identity is
malleable. Characters appropriate and reject qualities at the behest of the powerful. The goals
and stakes in this whole experiment are clear, but the means and ends are both fascinating and
problematic.
Of the three novels, The Cold Six Thousand explores political repression with the most
ambition. Political repression in the book is the political persecution of the black civil rights
movement and of violent white reactionaries by a white state authority. Littell's narrative is
concerned with the oppression of the civil rights movement and his failed attempt to subvert that
oppression. Through Littell, Ellroy examines the political landscape of the time. Following his
perspective, the reader is given a broad view of the race war raging at the time. Wayne's
narrative is an attempt to capture the era's psychology. It differs from Littell's narrative
significantly. Ellroy designs Wayne's story around elements from Freudian psychoanalysis,
namely Freud's work on dream-states and uncanniness (the manifestation of repressed emotions
and infantile desires in an object). Littell's narrative takes place in a world that is faithful to
reality in its depictions of characters and politics, but Wayne's seems to occur in a purely
fictional world. The characters he encounters, mainly black criminals and white racists, are
extreme stereotypes. He's seemingly trapped in an unresolved Oedipal complex and he spends

most of the novel hunting down Durfee, who enters as a Freudian uncanny. Ellroy plays with
Freud's theoretical constructions and reinterprets them.
The references to Freudian psychoanalysis have a strange effect on the novel. Ellroy
begins with an Oedipal triad between Wayne, his father, and his step-mother Janice. It unfolds
exactly as one might expect. Wayne lusts after Janice, then sleeps with her halfway through the
book. His hostility towards his father ultimately ends in his father's violent murder. Through an
analysis of Wayne's storyline, one can see how his desires are fulfilled in the plot, as if it were a
dream. However, the Oedipal triangle isn't enough to explain how the desires are fulfilled or
what the stakes actually are. His desires are as obvious to everybody involved as it is to the
reader. His stepmother "watched Wayne grow up. She torched reciprocal. She left her doors
open. She invited looks. Wayne Senior knew it. Wayne Senior didn't care" (7). Additionally, the
Oedipal complex is a failure to identify with the father figure. Ellroy does away with the notion
in two sentences: "[Wayne's mother] asked Wayne who he loved the most. He said, 'My dad.'"
(7). In Freud's reading of Sophocles' play, he writes, "Like Oedipus, we live in ignorance of
these wishes, repugnant to morality, which have been forced upon us by Nature, and after their
revelation we may all of us well seek to close our eyes to the scenes of our childhood (Freud
921). Wayne doesn't close his eyes to his childhood at all, his wishes are clearly on the surface of
the text, and both his childhood and his wishes are obvious to even the most ancillary of
characters. When Wayne descends into hatred over the course of the novel, a purely Freudian
reading isn't enough.
Instead, Wayne and Littell's trajectories are more in line with Gilles Deleuze and Félix
Guattari's schizoanalysis, a rejection of the Oedipal complex. For them, Freudian psychoanalysis
only serves to repress individuals. The psychoanalyst diagnoses them as mentally ill through the

catch-all of a mother-father-child triad (my mother did this, my father didn't do that, and that's
why I'm depressed and desire pills). Deleuze and Guattari's theories link personal repression to
societal repression. The connections they observe best describe the plot movements and
character motivations in Ellroy's novel. Schizoanalysis posits that the human unconscious is a
composite of machines, each machine requiring another to function. At the center of the
unconscious is desire, which is composed of unarticulated drives and impulses, called desiringmachines that produce the emotion (Smith 71). Desire, according to Deleuze and Guattari, is
based on need, not on lack—what is missing is what Freudian psychoanalysis considers the root
of desire. If one has an interest in taking up a career, there is a rational set of acts that allows one
to pursue that interest (applying to school, producing a thesis, entering the job market). While
one may be interested in the job, one actually desires the social system that makes that interest
possible (Smith 74). Desire isn't a negative term. One can't desire something that doesn't exist.
There is an object that is real and attainable. It is produced "by external causality and external
mechanisms" (Deleuze 27), and produced in the unconscious as a reality. A social formation
organizes certain wants and needs in order to control that society's populace. It produces
machines that complete desire. In doing so, it creates a feeling of lack in a subject not lack. An
extreme case: If one has an interest in killing another and he steps outside the means provided by
the state (say, the army), the state will diagnose the killer and relegate him to prison. The state
devalues that desire—it becomes, understandably, a sign of madness. To avoid repression by the
state and participate in society, the subject represses his interests, writing them off as fantastic
(Deleuze 26). Populations then desire for the state to repress these "undesirable" desires and
flows, thus desiring their own repression.

Though Deleuze and Guattari undermine notions of self and identity in Anti-Oedipus:
Capitalism and Schizophrenia, such notions exist for the characters in the novel. In
schizoanalysis, the subject naturally spreads over a range of objects, locating his desires within
them (Deleuze 21). Wayne and Littell resemble Deleuze-Guattarian schizophrenics (in the sense
of the etymology: "split-mind"). "The schizo has long since ceased to believe in [the ego]. He is
somewhere else, beyond or behind or below these problems, rather than immersed in them. And
wherever he is, there are problems, insurmountable sufferings, unbearable needs." Further,
"There are those who will maintain that the schizo is incapable of uttering the word I, and that
we must restore his ability to pronounce this hallowed word." Whether or not he says "I", if the
schizophrenic instead refers to himself in the third person, is of no consequence (23). Wayne and
Littell attempt to structure stable identities but fail. The book is concerned with what happens
after this failure, which in schizoanalysis is considered a psychological breakthrough. In Wayne's
case, the failure is entirely negative—he has a self-directed hatred that he then manifests in
various characters. First, he directs his emotions to black criminals, then to Martin Luther King
Jr., and finally (and impotently) towards his father. Littell's trajectory is slightly more positive.
The failure of identity allows him to psychologically separate from social forces. He is able to
empathize with civil rights activists and the repressive social structure, but makes the moral
decision to assist the latter.
Where does one go from the breakdown? Deleuze and Guattari write that there is the
schizophrenic, the revolutionary, and the neurotic. "There is a whole world of difference between
the schizo and the revolutionary: the difference between the one who escapes, and the one who
knows how to make what he is escaping escape" (Deleuze 341). The revolutionary locates and
diagnoses the repressive forces and the flows that repress, frees them, and invests it into the

social system, inciting change. The schizophrenic, in the face of chaotic movement, can only say
"Leave me in peace" (Deleuze 2), but the revolutionary attempts to reenter society after he
breaks free from it. The neurotic "is trapped within the residual or artificial territorialities of our
society, and reduces all of them to Oedipus as the ultimate territoriality" (Deleuze 35). He is able
to identify the flows of desire as well as the machines that repress him, but resorts to self-defeat
by participating in repressive psychoanalysis. Littell tries to be a revolutionary and because of
misguided actions and power movements he cannot control, he fails. He ends the novel as a
schizophrenic, no longer desiring to participate in the social order, and kills himself. Wayne is a
neurotic. He has a breakdown of identity after the murder of his wife, projects his guilt and
hatred on others, and finally returns to the Oedipal complex and usurps his father's position in the
repressive institutions.
According to Deleuze and Guattari, capitalism is a chaotic social formation, one that is
constructed rationally on purely abstract notions. Money-capital is abstract, yet society
constructs formations (class and markets, for example) dedicated to its management and
facilitate its trade. Castes are formed and the ones that control the flow of money are the most
powerful. However, the abstract flow of money renders the structure unstable. A capitalist social
formation has to define (code) different flows of capital yet make certain flows illegitimate. As
power shifts, the social formation then has to decode flows. It territorializes (establishes meaning
and codes), then deterritorializes (abstracting the meaning and decoding flows), and finally
reterritorializes (gives flows new meaning by recoding). In the shifts, subjects within a society
are alienated both socially and mentally. They break from the flows, and society goes through a
reterritorialization process where subjects are reclassified (Deleuze 320-1, Neff 311-2). The Cold
Six Thousand takes place at the point in American history where the lines of power in America

were being redrawn. The novel chronicles the civil rights movement from John F. Kennedy's
assassination to Martin Luther King Jr.'s. This process is evident in the book's take on the civil
rights movement. Much of the movement was about establishing a positive black identity in the
United States to combat the negative identity the white power structure had taken centuries to
establish. Without this, there could be no racial equality. There would still be class inequality,
however, which King hoped to end a year before his death. To do this, the whole power structure
would have to be destroyed.
In Ellroy's novels, the white power structure is a disjointed entity. The structure is a
chaotic composition composed of the CIA, FBI, Hughes' Las Vegas casino empire, wellestablished Ku Klux Klan groups, and the mafia. They have their own conflicts, but as a whole
they compromise one organization that has its guns pointed at the civil rights movement and they
are the most dominant centers of power in the three novels. There are, of course, outliers (Robert
F. Kennedy, white Freedom Riders, and fringe-Ku Klux Klan groups) that compromise the
authority of the structure and have to be repressed as well. In the case of liberal outliers, these
groups challenge the authority directly. The far-right reactionaries simply embarrass the
authority by breaking its laws. The mafia, surprisingly, isn't an outlier. In the books, they are
tightly linked to governmental organizations (especially the CIA) through the wealth their
activities acquire. Southern blacks threatened the white power structure of the American South
by engaging with sites of power: schools, transportation, eateries. Likewise the white power
structure had to defend its own authority and mobilized along class lines to repress the black
populace. Much of the novel is concerned with this mobilization and Ellroy constructs a
narrative that explores the identity conflicts at play in the white power structure.

The white power structure, as it stands in The Cold Six Thousand is described at a key
point in the novel. The description occurs right after the murders of the three activists John
Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael Schwerner during the Freedom Rides in Mississippi. It
was a significant moment in civil rights history as the murders of Goodman and Schwerner, two
white Jewish students, forced white America to confront the abuse of power in the South. It
revealed an irony: whites were being horribly persecuted in the name of segregation. The
narration in the book describes a power shift that began with Lyndon B. Johnson's civil rights
bill, which he pushed after the killings. "Mr. Hoover loathed [the bill]—but: Age 70 bodes.
Forced retirement bodes. LBJ says, 'Stay and strut your stuff.' Mr. Hoover gives thanks. That
means quid pro quo. LBJ says, 'Now fight my Klan war'". The narration then describes the inner
fighting within the Klan. A New Klan is emerging and its tactics are less about intimidation and
more about outright, public violence. The Old Klan committed lynchings and mutilations, state
crimes, which often were perpetrated by authority figures and legitimized. They do commit mail
fraud, which the FBI mostly ignored until after the civil rights bill was passed. However, the
high profile beatings and murders of activists is not a federal crime. FBI agents begin
investigating the New Klan for state crimes, which "vexes" and "offends" Hoover. "LBJ
mandates war. Two hundred agents descend. A hundred for Neshoba County—three probable
victims—thirty-three agents per vic. Dr. King visits. Bayard Rustin visits. Bayard Rustin briefs
Littell." All of this movement "pissed off [Hoover's] klavernite plants. They were shrill. They
were racist." Lyndon B. Johnson's decision "bruised [Hoover's] racist aesthetic" (215). The
description shows some of the reterritorialization occurring at the time. The White House forces
the FBI to break from its normal code of conduct. In doing so, they define appropriate levels of
violence in the citizenry.

The conflict between the white power structure and the elements it attempts to repress is
encapsulated in the Counter Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO) Operation Black Rabbit. It's
a fictional condensation of the real anti-left and anti-white-hate COINTELPROs. Historian
David Cunningham, quoting FBI historian Kenneth O'Reilly writes, "Hoover saw the Ku Klux
Klan as another subversive threat to the peace and stability of middle America, but he also saw
the Klan as a threat to the good name of the anti-civil rights movement. Klansmen were
discrediting all forms of resistance, including the FBI's preferred forms, and for that, the director
decided that they had to be stopped" (331). Cunningham continues that the KKK's behavior
"threatened the legitimacy of established authority structures" (342). "The good name of the anticivil rights movement" is the sort of unwittingly ironic phrase that characters in The Cold Six
Thousand would sincerely say. Indeed, Hoover's real life sentiment is echoed in the novel.
In Operation Black Rabbit, everybody is given a codename and all are anonymous to one
another. Hoover tells Littell: "Martin Luther King will be RED RABBIT. Bayard Rustin will be
PINK RABBIT. Lyle Holly will be WHITE RABBIT. You will be most appropriately known as
CRUSADER RABBIT." Lyle Holly is the name of a plant in the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC) and has the ear of King. The names are semi-comic. Red Rabbit is a
reference to King's Socialist leanings. Pink Rabbit refers to Rustin's homosexuality. Hoover, still
maintaining that Littell is a loyal goon, considers the term Crusader Rabbit ironic. However, it
gets at the heart of Littell's identity. Before his transformation in American Tabloid, he was
referred to as a liberal crusader. The rabbit, fast and unpredictable, is a perfect metaphor for
Littell and his actions. Further names include Wayne Tedrow Senior as FATHER RABBIT and
CIA agent Bob Relyea as WILD RABBIT. Their jobs are to curtail the New Klan while
disseminating hate literature. The ultimate goal of the operation is to discredit Martin Luther

King Jr. and Bayard Rustin, producing information that alludes to "their Communist
associations, hypocritical moral behavior, and sexual degeneracy" and "engender distrust and
resentment…within the Negro community and undercut the recent non-Negro cache [Northern
liberal activists] that RED RABBIT had engineered" (354-5) Finally, Hoover intends "to
implement the WHITE-HATE arm of OPERATION BLACK RABBIT…in order to buttress the
FBI's anti-Klan, anti-racist credentials and rebuff anti-FBI sentiment disseminated by civil-rights
provocateurs and members of the liberal-socialist press" (345). This captures the political
repression required to sustain the white power structure. The goal is to make rebellion and
unsanctioned violence undesirable. Once these are made undesirable, the populace at large will
begin to think that the white power structure's repression of these undesirable desires is
legitimate and necessary. If successful (it isn't), Americans will desire their own repression.
In Ted Ryan's analysis of white masculinity in American Tabloid, he suggests, "by asking
the reader to become involved with the oppressors, their prejudices, their savagery, and their
crises, and by largely reducing the oppressed to the status of passive ciphers, Ellroy is also in
danger of contributing to the 'process of recentering rather than decentering' whiteness" (Ryan
279). This is an ethical concern that hangs over the entire trilogy. Ryan is rightly concerned—
American Tabloid identifies the base emotions of the oppressors, but oscillates between
criticizing them and reveling in its knowing performance of them. The previous chapter doesn't
go in depth in Ellroy's depiction of non-whites, but instead focuses on women and homosexuals.
Blacks in American Tabloid are ciphers. Ellroy in American Tabloid is limited to the perspective
of the white power structure, which dismiss non-whites, women, and homosexuals. Through the
deconstruction of female archetypes and through Lenny Sands' plotline, he gives two of the three
voices and presence. The blacks and Cubans don't get the same treatment. The Cold Six

Thousand's focus on the oppression of blacks and racist hatred attempts to keep the aesthetic of
the first novel and address the concerns of a limited perspective. Littell and Wayne continually
construct their own identities black people, who are much more clearly defined than they are. It's
an attempt to have one's cake and eat it too.
Littell is the only protagonist in the first novel who doesn't repress aspects of his past or
his political interests. Kemper Boyd exaggerates his persona, Pete hides his French-Canadian
heritage and past, but Littell is an unabashed liberal. He gets beaten down throughout the
beginning of the first book. First, he's trapped in a humiliating job eavesdropping for Chicago's
ineffectual anti-Communist COINTELPRO (he gets caught looking at an elderly man's donut
receipts), and is routinely bullied by his right-wing FBI colleagues. He quells his anxieties with
alcohol. He desires to help Robert F. Kennedy to destroy Hoffa's teamsters, going so far as to rob
their fundbooks. Pete Bondurant beats him to a pulp the first time around, but he's ultimately
successful. Afterwards, he's abandoned by his idol Robert F. Kennedy. From the burgled
fundbooks, he discovers that the mob had funded the Kennedy family, which he tracks through
the three million the family used to bribe Laura Hughes. He sees that the Kennedy family is
intertwined with the world he despises. His seemingly stable identity as a passionate liberal
comes to a dead end. At this realization, he desires nothing but the humiliation and the
destruction of Robert Kennedy, something that the white power structure approves of, as
Kennedy is the common enemy between J. Edgar Hoover and the Mafia. He adopts an opposite
persona—a Mafia lawyer and Hoover confidante. It is through this persona that he is given
immeasurable access within the white power structure and he becomes a chief conspirator in
John F. Kennedy's assassination. In American Tabloid, Littell's identity collapses and in order to
participate in the world, he has to adopt a monstrous travesty of what he thought defined him.

Dallas, the site of JFK's assassination, is the site for a Freudian return of the repressed.
With Wayne, Dallas is the site that conjures the world of racism he was brought up in. After he
returns to Las Vegas, he goes to his father's house. He meets Chuck Rogers, the JFK triggerman
from American Tabloid, who is showing a culled FBI surveillance video to some racist Mormon
elders. "Chuck ran the projector. Film hit a pull screen. Tight on: Martin Luther King. He's fat.
He's nude. He's ecstatic. He's fucking a white woman hard…Static hiss and film flecks. Sprocket
holes and numbers—FBI code. Covert work/surveillance film/some lens distortion." Chuck reads
from a hate tract that is meant to accompany the film, much to the delight of the elders. Wayne
destroys the projector and film. He then uncovers a pile of hate cartoons. "Martin Luther Coon
and the plump woman. Fat Jews with fangs. Martin Luther Coon—priapic. His dick's a branding
iron. It's red hot. The head's a hammer-and-scythe. Wayne spat on the picture. Wayne ripped it
crossways. Wayne shredded it up" (112-3). The passage is rich with psycho-sexual meaning. It's
a ridiculous image, a group of clean-cut Mormon elders yukking at pornography. They co-opt a
surveillance film meant to discredit Martin Luther King Jr., view it as pornography, and enjoy it
as comedy. It recalls Lenny Sands' homophobic stand-up act. The King cartoon is explicit in the
fears projected onto it. The branding iron points to a white man's fear that, if the civil rights
movement were successful, the black man will enslave the white race under Communist rule. It
recalls Birth of a Nation, which in the end, calls for the exclusion of blacks from the democratic
process lest they chase white women and attempt to marry them. The connections are completely
irrational, which is the point. These tracts are meant to provoke feelings of sexual inadequacy,
fears of a changing world, and point them to a target. The image is a tactic in the race war, but its
double-edged. It calls for the repression of blacks based on their perceived sexual prowess and
politics. For this to work, the white audience acknowledges that Martin Luther King would be a

better lay than they are and that the "market" on white women is now open to black men. The
hate tract devalues their own sexual desires (white sexuality is lesser than black sexuality, the
tract proposes) and values violent and political action. What is notable is that Wayne acts
impulsively. It offends him and he destroys it.
Wayne's offense is understandable given some background information that is revealed.
He was a witness to the Little Rock incident, the key moment when an Arkansas public school
was desegregated under the eye of the National Guard, and to the violence of the protests.
"[Wayne] saw Little Rock. Wayne Senior didn't. The Klan torched a car. The gas cap blew. It put
a colored boy's out. Some punks raped a colored girl. They wore rubbers. They shoved them in
her mouth" (137). After witnessing this horror, he attempts to estrange himself from the world he
grew up in. For a white cop in 1960's America, this is perceived as a weakness. Maynard Moore,
a Dallas cop charged with silencing JFK-conspiracy witnesses and, unrelated to that assignment,
the hunting down of Wendell Durfee, says to Wayne:
I heard you got leanings your daddy don’t much care for…Let's try nigger lover. Let's try
you chauffeur Sonny Liston around when he comes to Vegas, 'case the PD's afraid he'll
get himself in trouble with liquor and white women, and you like him, but you don't like
the nice Italian folks who keep your little town clean (5).
Wayne is mocked for being a race traitor, a subservient to boxer Sonny Liston. The insistence on
"like" serves to mark him as a house slave, someone who sold out to the "enemy." Moore sees
this as an aesthetic stance. Wayne has a token black friend, one that has to be prevented from
destroying the moral fabric of a city that the mafia is working so hard to upkeep. Wayne's stance,
while valid, clashes with society. Ellroy fully intends this all to be ironic. He goes at great length
to paint Maynard Moore as a moron, a belligerent racist that draws the ire of almost everybody
he meets. Moore also owes money to Las Vegas mobsters—he mocks Wayne's progressive

views yet he's invested in a system that represses him by making money desirable but
unattainable.
Freud defines the phenomenon of the uncanny as "that class of frightening which leads
back to what is known of old and long familiar" (220). For uncanniness to register, the subject
"identifies himself with someone else, so that he is in doubt as to which his self is, or substitutes
the extraneous self for his own" (234). Durfee arrives in the novel as a Freudian uncanny. He's an
archetype of black criminality, an exaggeration that would seem to exist in the imagination of
white racists. What is most surprising is that Durfee is given the most salient and complete
physical description in the whole novel. Wayne is never described physically, only emotionally.
At the end of the first chapter, Wayne reads Wendell Durfee's police file.
Durfee, Wendell (NMI). Male Negro/DOB 6-6-27/Clark County, Nevada…
Pander beefs—3/44 up. "Well known dice-game habitué." No busts outside Vegas and
Dallas.
"Known to drive Cadillacs."
"Known to wear flamboyant attire."
"Known to have fathered 13 children out of wedlock."
"Known to pander Negro women, white women, male homosexuals & Mexican
transvestites."
Twenty-two pimp busts. Fourteen convictions. Nine child-support liens. Five bail jumps
(8).
Durfee, Wendell: gambler pimp, fashion plate, fancy ride, absentee father, jailbird. It's a veritable
checklist of African-American stereotyping. However, Wayne empathizes with him—he knows
that the crime he's hunting Durfee down for was an act of self-defense. Later, Wayne and Moore
track Durfee down, having a shootout with him during an alleyway dice game, then in a desert
parking lot. The stereotyping continues, "Shitfire—there's Wendell Durfee. He's got pimp
threads. He's got a hair net. He's got a jigaboo conk. He's got a piece—it's a quiff automatic."
Wayne kills Moore and lets Durfee free. Over the course of the novel, we learn that Durfee is
also a drug dealer and a serial rapist and killer claiming his wife as a victim. Not long after

Wayne destroys his father's hate propaganda, he learns that the Durfee is in Las Vegas to kill
him—no motive is ever given.
Before Wayne leaves Dallas, there is one notable moment where we get a sense of some
sort of physicality, but it's in relation to Durfee. Wayne interviews a black man who knew
Durfee personally. The man's dog plays with Wayne, and the man tells him "He liked Wendell,
so I liked him too." The man tells Wayne that Durfee crossed the border to Mexico. When the
man sees the dog nuzzling Wayne, he tells him "Dogs can be fooled just like anyone else."
Wayne lets the man in on his plan to let Durfee go, if Durfee were to return, then Wayne will
arrest him. When the man asks why Wayne would take that risk for Durfee, Wayne replies,
"Your dog likes me, leave it at that." There is a tenuous likeness drawn between Durfee and
Wayne. The dog instinctively likes both characters—for this to happen, there has to be a physical
or behavioral similarity between the two.
Wayne's trajectory is foreshadowed in the moments following Lynnette's death. When
Wayne discovers her body, he attempts suicide by putting a fully loaded gun into his mouth, but
the gun jams. Later, the image of her corpse haunts him: "He saw the flaps. He saw the sheared
ribs. He saw where the knife snapped bone. Wayne Junior didn't blame him. Wayne Junior
blamed himself" (181). Wayne takes responsibility for Lynette's death, which, more or less,
attributes the blame on Durfee's existence and Wayne's own mercy. Wayne blames himself
directly and Durfee by extension. On a purely formal level, Durfee's name isn't even mentioned.
He is only referred to by his pronoun, meaning there are three characters (Wayne, Durfee,
Lynette) and only two pronouns (he, she). Two men for one "he." At the funeral, the narration
describes Wayne and Lynette's relationship by mocking the characters and their conflicts by
reducing them to a base timeline. It adopts the tone of the preacher and acts as a crib sheet to his

speech. "Soldier boy. Yankee. She was seventeen. You wooed her. She killed your baby. You
made her do it" (193). Then, there is a list of meaningless phrases: "Loving spirit. Sacred child.
Blessed in Christ's name." Ellroy undercuts Wayne's wish for his wife's silence by making it
trite. More salient is what happens outside the funeral. Wayne looks at a black chauffeur:
The chauffeur stood around. The chauffeur filed his nails. The chauffeur wore a
hair net. He had Durfee hair. He had Durfee skin. He had Durfee's lank frame.
Wayne watched him. Wayne retouched his hair. Wayne retouched his skin.
Wayne made him Wendell D.
…The chauffeur buffed his nails.
Wayne watched him.
He burned his face. He smashed his teeth. He fed him Big "H." (194)
Wayne begins to project the image of Wendell Durfee onto the black chauffeur and tortures the
chauffeur in his mind. The final part calls attention to one of the larger plots of the novel—the
mafia, in order to keep the civil rights movement out of Las Vegas, their home base, plans on
importing large quantities of heroin and distribute them to poor black communities. His
imaginary torture of the black chauffeur is linked to the political repression of AfricanAmericans in Las Vegas. Big "H": heroin, hate.
Later, there is a moment where Wayne's involvement in the King assassination is
foreshadowed. Wayne, at his father's ranch, spools in the FBI video the Mormon elders were
enjoying:
Said film ran high-contrast. Black and white skin/black & white stock.
King shut his eyes. King went ecstatic. King preached in Little Rock. He saw him
live in '57.
The woman bit her lips. Lynette always did that. The woman had Barb-style hair.
It hurt. He watched anyway. King thrashed and threw sweat.
The film blurred—lens haze and distortion. The skin tones blurred—King went
Wendell Durfee-dark. (211)
Watching the film, Wayne first plays it in the wrong exposure so that the blacks and whites are
exaggerated. King's speechmaking is then attributed to his sexual prowess, and the woman first

becomes his dead wife, then Pete's wife. This passage, compared to the description of the elders
watching it earlier, is meant to show a difference between Wayne's masochistic and malleable
hatred and the elders'. It recalls the difference between the New Klan and the Old Klan. As
serious as the Old Klan was, their hatred was partly based on a certain set of political theories.
To them, Martin Luther King Jr.'s phallus was a Communist branding iron and the video was
proof of the black man's threat to their sexuality. Like Hoffa's Teamsters and Lenny Sands' camp
performance, they're laughter is a result of their ability to recognize how over the top it all is. J.
Edgar Hoover tells Littell that Wayne Senior's Klavern "was probably more genteel than the
Klan groups currently down south." They never lynched any African-Americans, but Hoover is
"certain they would have enjoyed it…Most people have entertained the notion. You must credit
their restraint" (190). The New Klan, more outright in their violence sees these images and
locates the base emotions they feel onto people. However, in the creation and viewing of these
pictures, Wayne watches the surveillance footage primarily out of self-hatred, that self-hate
symbolized in Wendell Durfee. Then, he projects that symbol onto Martin Luther King Jr.
Wayne's affected identity as open-minded utterly fails. In fact, it splits. As stated earlier,
Wayne's own identity is only described in relation to Wendell Durfee. Durfee's identity, in the
prose, is far more tangible than Wayne's. Wayne desires the destruction of his own identity,
which requires that he have one in the first place, and Durfee is the machine that can fulfill that
desire. Durfee becomes an extension of Wayne and since Wayne was willing to take his own life,
he is willing to take Durfee's. In Durfee's absence, black men become outlets for his suicide.
Immediately after Wayne fails to kill himself, he murders three of Durfee's associates.
The murders are symptoms of Wayne's failure to repress his suicidal urge. He and Wendell
Durfee are joined at the hip. Durfee is absent, Wayne fails to kill himself, so he hunts down three

heroin dealers. Wayne beats the first man Cur-ti and stuffs his mouth with heroin, overdosing
him. Then, Wayne proceeds to kill his brother Otis:
[Wayne] broke [Otis'] teeth. He broke his nose. He broke the gun butt. His lips moved.
His mouth moved. His eyeballs clicked up. His eyes showed pure white.
Wayne picked the TV up. Wayne dropped it on his head. The tubes burst and
exploded. They burned his face up. (165)
Just as there was the pronoun confusion when Wayne blames himself for his wife's murder, it
also appears here. Who's eyes showed pure white? It's obviously Otis, since he's being murdered,
but on a purely grammatical level, the "he" can be either one of them. In both murders, he makes
their identities unrecognizable first by burning Otis' face, then decapitating Leroy with a shotgun.
Wayne gets away with the murders. Even the NAACP lets him off for it, which is a curious
moment in the novel: "Sergeant Tedrow, under great personal duress, acted in a somewhat
heedless but recognizably non-malicious manner that did not include racist designs" (186). This
information was given to the NAACP by Ward Littell and their gesture of exoneration is done as
a favor for his support. Littell and Bayard Rustin discuss Tedrow and Rustin recognizes that
three men were useless to the cause: "Negro junkies weren't four girls in church" (179). The civil
rights movement, in the novel, needed a positive identity. Shedding tears over three black addicts
and dealers would be pointless. In a way, this devalues Wayne's crisis and keeps him out of the
political sphere. He sees himself in people that simply do not exist.
In his shizoanalytic reading of The Black Dahlia, D.S. Neff writes that the protagonist's
search for a stable self "has effectively insulated him from revolutionary insights" and placed
him "from among forces perpetuating fascism and racism within an ostensibly egalitarian and
democratic culture" (319). Wayne's identity collapses precisely because he thought it was stable.
In the novel, there is no identity in whiteness. To think of oneself as white means one thinks of

one's self only in the power and privileges he holds over others. As historian Noel Ignatiev,
founder of the progressive magazine Race Traitor, said in a lecture:
Whiteness is not a culture. There is Irish culture and Italian culture and American
culture—the latter…a mixture of the Yankee, the Indian, and the Negro (with a pinch of
ethnic salt); there is youth culture and drug culture and queer culture; but there is no such
thing as white culture. Whiteness has nothing to do with culture and everything to do
with social position…Without the privileges attached to it, the white race would not exist,
and the white skin would have no more social significance than big feet. ("The Point")
This gets at why Littell's identity is valid and Wayne's isn't. They're similar: They're politics are
understandable and reasonable given what they've witnessed. They are both derided by the status
quo. However, Wayne's stance is a statement of power. His identity is predicated on the
unequality between blacks and whites. If blacks were to become agents of equal power, his
identity would be meaningless. Ward's political identity is predicated on the inherent equality
between the races that the status quo denies. His collapse of self in the first novel was due to the
willful ignorance of his enemies' (Hoover and the Mafia) motivations and inner workings. When
Littell begins working for them, he learns how they work and experiences the complexity of the
power struggles as a major player. He is inspired by Robert Kennedy's comeback and the
successes of the civil rights movement. Wayne searches for a stable identity, Littell reclaims his
past identity and experience renders it pliable.
Just as Wayne first encounters Durfee through a rap sheet, Littell first encounters Bayard
Rustin through an FBI file:
SUBJECT RUSTIN must be viewed as a cunning subversive with a significant history of
Communist-inspired alliances & as a pronounced security threat, due to his alliances with
perceived "Mainstream" Negro demagogues, such as MARTIN LUTHER KING & A.
PHILLIP RANDOLPH. SUBJECT RUSTIN'S radical Quaker background & his parents'
association with the NAACP…point out the extent of his early radical indoctrination.
(141)

There are several similarities between Littell and Rustin. Littell is a cunning subversive with
Communist-inspired politics. He was allied to the Kennedy's through an alias. He also was a
devout Catholic. There is one glaring difference, however. The file goes in depth with Rustin's
homosexuality. "SUBJECT RUSTIN'S homosexuality is well known & is considered to be an
embarrassment to the alleged 'Mainstream' Negro 'Leaders' who utilize his skills as an organizer
& orator" (141). Rustin's homosexuality, according to the file, caused his expulsion from a black
college and landed him in jail. Littell was likewise bullied for his politics, at one point in
American Tabloid, his girlfriend Helen Agee was expelled from her school when Hoover
discovered his involvement in Robert Kennedy's Mafia investigations. His politics cost him, just
as homosexuality had cost Rustin. Unlike Littell, Rustin never gave up. Though his visibility in
the civil rights movement was limited, he was still instrumental and productive.
Littell's encounter with Rustin may be his most genuine moment. Like all spy movies, the
two meet on a bench in a park in Washington DC. Littell is pretending to be a fallen liberal who
retired from the FBI out of disgust. More or less, he's pretending to be the person he wished he is
and the person he once was. Hoover gives him the task of offering mob money to fund the
SCLC. Hoover hopes that if the organization takes it, he can discredit it. Littell waits for Rustin,
who arrives late. "A tall man-dressed and groomed-more gaunt than his mug shots. He sat down.
He crossed his legs. He cleared bench space. Littell said, 'How did you recognize me?' Rustin
smiled. 'You were the only one not involved in the democratic process'" (158). Rustin's statement
cuts through Littell's mask and gets to Littell's desire for identity. Rustin has the ability to
disassemble Littell. Through FBI files and surveillance information, Littell knows Rustin. They
are on equal footing and instantly strike camaraderie:
Rustin smiled. "Do you hate [Hoover]?"
"No."

"After what he put you through?"
"I find it hard to hate people who are that true to themselves."
"Have you studied passive resistance?"
"No, but I've witnessed the futility of the alternative."
Rustin laughed. "That's an extraordinary statement for a Mafia lawyer to make."
A wind stirred. Littell shivered.
"I know something about you, Mr. Rustin. You're a gifted and compromised man.
I may not have your gifts, but I suspect that I run neck-and-neck in the compromise
department."
Littell is a walking contradiction and Rustin is savvy enough to see through the ruse and appeal
to his genuine sentiments. Littell unconsciously resists his desire to open up to him. A cold wind
causes him to shiver right at the moment Rustin hints at the falseness of Littell's identity as a
Mafia lawyer. When Littell reveals that he admires King, he buttons his coat. Rustin tells Littell,
"You'll be hearing some bad things about our Martin. Mr. Hoover has been sending out missives.
Martin Luther King is the devil with horns. He seduces women and employs Communists (160)."
The suggestion that Littell is still involved with Hoover, which is true, causes Littell to put his
gloves on. Though Littell doesn't recognize it at the moment, his ability to participate in the civil
rights movement is compromised by his allegiance with Hoover. Both characters leave and for
two sentences, we're left with an empty park. "The park glowed. Mr. Hoover bestows all gifts.
(160)." The narration reminds the reader that all of this occurred within Hoover's jurisdiction.
Littell is told to infiltrate the movement for Hoover by taking up this "fallen liberal"
image. Hoover fully intends him to continue with that travesty of identity, a man whose genuine
political desires (and his desire for validation from his heroes) are an affectation. The character
Lyle Holly is another such travesty. He is a right-leaning FBI agent who in infiltrating the SCLC
begins to adore Martin Luther King Jr. Lyle is the brother of Dwight Holly, one of the
protagonists in Blood's a Rover. Both are the sons of the Grand Dragon of the Indiana Klan, the
same Klan the Tedrow's are involved with. They grew up with Wayne (158). Unlike Wayne,

Lyle is still a believer. Hoover describes Lyle: "Lyle is more impetuous. He drinks more than he
should and comes off as a hail-fellow-well-met. The Negroes adore him. He's convinced them
that he's the world's most incongruously liberal ex-cop, when in fact that prize goes to you"
(140). In some ways, Lyle is a reminder of the uglier aspects of Littell's past. He's regularly
drunk and awfully ingratiating. "Lyle worked the Red Squad. Lyle studied the Left. Lyle talked
Left and thought Right. They shared similar credentials. They shared the same disjuncture. Lyle
cracked racial jokes. Lyle said he loved Dr. King" (158). They share a disconnection between
performance and identity. The final comparison collapses their similarities in one sentence, "Lyle
oozed Littell-like empathy" (158). They are both able to project they're personalities into other
people and understand them. Though Lyle thinks right, what comes out of his mouth is an affect.
Before Lyle's death, Littell confronts him at a casino in Las Vegas. Lyle tells Littell, "I think I'm
schizophrenic. I work for the SCLC, I work for Mr. Hoover. I'm on Black Rabbit one minute,
voting-rights drives the next. Dwight says I'm psychologically unhinged" (427). Like Littell,
Lyle split his personality two ways. Unlike Littell, Lyle is trapped and hopeless—his identities
clash mid-sentence. Lyle says, "Martin Luther Coon's the only saint I know, and I've got some
hair-curling shit on him…or hair-kinking in this case." Lyle has the power to discredit King, but
his admiration and racism conflict with one another. Instead of just giving this evidence to
Hoover, Lyle drunkenly gambles in a casino, imagining ways to skim SCLC funds to finance his
addictions. His suffering is manifest in a scene where he gambles with Sammy Davis Jr. Lyle
desires his attention, and Davis uses Lyle to complete an impromptu comic double act. Lyle is
the comic stooge, "a Rat Pack reject." Lyle is game, willingly embarrassing himself to a growing
crowd so Davis can get a laugh. However, as Littell watches the act, he catches Lyle's
mutterings: "coon" and "kike" (428-9). As soon as the crowd disperses, Lyle goes catatonic and

Littell drags him to his car. In a social atmosphere, Lyle wants to be seen as Davis' buddy yet
calls him racial epithets, as if to affirm his reactionary identity.
The information Lyle compiled is proof of King's socialist agenda. Littell destroys Lyle's
house to make it look like it was burglarized. He discovers Nazi regalia and finds Lyle's report in
a folder covered with "Nazi maidens and shivs. It was marked. It was circled: 'Marty'" (431).
Lyle's summary reads:
MLK has discussed the following topics in high-level SCLC staff meetings, has
forbidden staff members to announce them publicly…and has rebuffed all criticism that
points out one obvious fact: The breadth of his socialistic agenda will divert his energies,
deplete SCLC resources and undermine the credibility of the civil-rights movement. It
will enrage the American status quo, perhaps cost him congressional and presidential
support and will earn him the enmity of his 'limousine liberal' supporters. The true danger
of his plans is that they may well serve to fuel and unite a coalition of hard-core
Communists, Communist sympathizers, far-left intellectuals, disaffected college students
and Negroes susceptible to inflammatory rhetoric and prone to violent action. (431-2)
The image of the Nazi doodles and the actual content of the file is symbolic of the schizophrenia
Lyle suffers. This information would kill the civil rights movement and if disseminated would
totally discredit it. It would fulfill Operation Black Rabbit and satisfy the desire of the white
power structure to finally repress King and Rustin's rebellion. "MLK on slums: 'The economic
perpetuation of Negro poverty….20th century slavery, euphemized by politicians of all stripes
and creeds. A cancerous social reality and a condition which mandates a massive redistribution
of assets and wealth." To Littell, Martin Luther King Jr.'s scheme is "huge. It's grand. It's
magnificent. It's insane. It's megalomaniacal. Littell rubbed his eyes. Littell fought double-vision.
Littell dribbled sweat" (433). The report is revolutionary in the Deleuze-Guattarian sense of the
term. Martin Luther King Jr. locates the flow capitalism is based on and proposes the
reinvestment of capital to create true equality. Ward knows that if the document gets into

Hoover's hands, Hoover will seek to annihilate King. He burns the report and flushes it down a
sink.
When Lyle returns to his house, Littell listens in from afar. The burglary is committed
while Lyle is passed out in his car as Littell drives it from Las Vegas to Los Angeles. "[Littell]
gauged time. He knew booze regimens. He knew pass-outs and wake-ups. He knew pass-out
stats. Three hours—four tops. Lyle wakes up/Where am I?/Oh fuck" (430). Littell, an alcoholic,
knows exactly how Lyle will react down to the hour. Moreover, he goes into Lyle's head. While
it isn't a stretch to imagine how one would react if they pass out in Las Vegas and wake up in
Los Angeles, Ellroy takes the identification between the two further. Littell trashes Lyle's house
"systematic." When the burglary is finished, he tosses out Lyle's Nazi regalia and waits outside
the house. "Littell shut his eyes. He heard crash sounds. He heard toss sounds. He heard oh no
yells. He opened his eyes. He checked his watch. He timed Lyle seeing things…Lyle ran out.
Littell clocked it: 3.6 minutes" (433). When Littell systematically wrecked Lyle's place, he did so
with the knowledge that Lyle would look for certain objects. First, the fascist iconography and
then the file. In removing these objects, Littell removed the objects that symbolized Lyle's
schizophrenia yet further entraps Lyle in this delirium. Without the file, Lyle would be forced to
continue splitting himself between the SCLC and Hoover yet fail to win any sort of affirmation
from either. While Sammy Davis Jr. was mocking Lyle in Las Vegas, Littell informed Hoover
that Lyle was not only embarassing himself and fleecing SCLC funds. The SCLC, off-page,
discovers where their money is going and stops payment. By looking at Littell's story-line, how
he became an agent for the Mafia, Hoover, and the civil rights movement, one could imagine
what Lyle's survival would entail. Lyle would be indebted to the Mafia and Hoover would be the
only person who could protect him. He would then be indebted to Hoover, who would probably

force him to continue with Operation Black Rabbit. Lyle, however, would lose the SCLC's trust
and Martin Luther King Jr.'s ear. There would be no escape from of his delirium. Suicide would
be the only way out, and he takes it. Like Lyle, Littell is further entrapped. Without both the file
and Lyle, Hoover has to escalate Operation Black Rabbit. It quickly grows out of control.
As King's socialist movement gathers speed, Operation Black Rabbit collapses. King
announces the Poor People's March (ultimately unsuccessful after his assassination a month prior
to the march). In the book, a headline reads: "KING ON SPRING MARCH: 'TIME TO
CONFRONT POWER STRUCTURE MASSIVELY.'" Lyndon B. Johnson calls up Hoover and
requests him to prevent the march, as it's success would be a blow to the legitimacy of his civil
rights policy. He asks Hoover, "has my legislation improved the lot of the Negro people?...have I
been a friend to Martin Luther King?" (590-1). Hoover's response is to comically plant his black
chauffeur in the movement. They attempt to entrap Rustin in a tryst with the actor Sal Mineo, but
fail. Operation Black Rabbit, through Lyle's death and the growing failures to discredit the
movement, ends. King's plot, in the novel, succeeds in disrupting the power structure. Robert
Kennedy joins him. Wayne Tedrow Sr. and Dwight Holly break from the operation and plot
King's assassination. The presidency and the FBI are made illegitimate and a center of power
forms around the repressed reactionaries. The structure deterritorializes, but then redraws the
boundaries of power to include the deluded and hateful. This is evident in the sections of the
book composed of document inserts: the FBI memos, wire-tap transcripts, and newspaper
headlines. Late in the novel, when Wayne Senior and Dwight plot, we get hate-mail excerpts
from James Earl Ray and Sirhan Sirhan. They are comically insane. Sirhan Sirhan's first letter (a
short section extracted from 19 pages) to Robert F. Kennedy tells him "YOU ARE A PUS
PUPPET IN THE CONTROL OF THE JEWISH VAMPIRE AND MUST STOP EMITTING

HEADACHES." James Earl Ray's letters to Dr. King are poems with rhyme schemes, "But the
White Man's wise to your evil ways; / The bounty means you'd better pray and count your days"
(557). When the two men not only enter society but are also coddled by it, possibilities are
opened for Wayne. After they are used, the power structure will have to punish them in order to
legitimize their authority.
Later, Wayne kills a black pimp named Bongo in Vietnam. He becomes a heroin chemist,
developing drugs to be sold to poor blacks in Las Vegas' slums. He kills Bongo by injecting him
with poisoned heroin and crushing his skull as he convulsed. The narration summarizes the
killing: "He killed Bongo. He committed. He joined the war then. He squashed a bug. It felt
right. It felt impersonal. He killed Bongo. He dumped Bongo. He took his own pulse. Sixty-two
beats a minute—no malice/no stress." Killing Bongo yields no immediate satisfaction to Wayne's
desire, the murder is, ironically, committed without hate or stress. The war refers to the race war
rather than the Vietnam War. Wayne becomes a desensitized soldier.
Earlier in the novel, there is a chapter that begins, "HATE. It moved him. It ran him. It
called his shots. He stayed cool with it. He stayed justified. He never said NIGGER. They
weren't all bad." The narrative voice continues, "He never thought NIGGER. He never condoned
the concept." Though Wayne doesn't think or say the word, the narrative voice has no problem
doing it for him. This is where the narrative voice calls attention to a speaker. There is a voice
that hectors Wayne, though he can't hear it. "He tracked THEM. He trailed THEM. He prowled
West LV. He looked for Wendell Durfee. It was futile. He knew it. The HATE drew him there"
(217). The "THEM" is meant to imply black criminals. Then, there's a chapter that mirrors the
previous:

NIGGER.
He never thought it. He never said it. It was ugly. It was stupid. It made you
THEM.
Wayne took back roads. Wayne saw shit shacks and crop rows. Wayne saw
THEM.
They tilled dirt. They hauled brush. They dished slop. Wayne made them Bongo.
Wayne made them Wendell D.
It is revealed that the "THEM" refers to the Klan. This is one of the strangest moments in the
novel. Wayne's destructive desires are finally expanded to poor, white racists. The hate that
stems from his upbringing has finally come around full circle. However, there are two elements
at play that make his ability to kill them impossible. There is a fundamental disconnect between
Wayne and the Klan in that they say the epithet that he refuses to even think. Oddly, Ellroy
chooses to emblazon the word at the top of the chapter. Secondly, Wayne's reaction to Bongo's
death should be a sign that he's trapped in a meaningless game. Killing, in Wayne's split mind, is
a means towards suicide and the self-hate required to commit this act is no longer there. He folds
and gives himself up to the Klan and his father. He turns to the Klan so he can learn how to "hate
smart" like his father, meaning transforming hate to create order.
This sends Wayne ever hurtling towards Martin Luther King Jr., the figure that can truly
create chaos in the social order. Wayne Senior's Klan intends to reestablish the old order and
repress the productive chaos of King's march and the counter-productive chaos that the march
will inspire. "Coloreds mock order. Coloreds foist chaos. Coloreds breed lunacy. The haters
knew it. Wayne Senior knew it. He knew it. The haters lived to hate. That was wrong. That was
lunacy. The haters lived disordered lives. The haters thrived on chaos. The haters mimed the
hatees" (581). From this point of view, the repression of black civil rights activists would further
repress the truly destructive force in the novel, the New Klan—they are the chaos the socialist
movement will spawn, the force that would destroy the white power structure's legitimacy. To

learn to "hate smart," Wayne thinks he has to finally locate and locate Wendell Durfee, who he
sees as the source of his hatred. The way he does so is curious—he injects him with heroin and
anesthetic, then proceeds to eviscerate Durfee's body. He then sits and watches Durfee bleed to
death. In the scene, there is no indication that Wayne feels anything. Instead, Ellroy describes
Durfee's psychological experience. As heroin is injected into his legs, "Wendell grinned.
Wendell sooooooared. Wendell smaaacked out and up" (621). The scene is brutal (Durfee's
fingers and legs are eventually shot off), but it is hugely anti-climactic. The violence seems to be
written only to shock. For a scene that is meant to be the manifestation of an emotion it is
completely devoid of it. Considering Wayne's reaction to Bongo, it makes sense. The murder
simply doesn't matter—but as the book winds down to a close, it seems Ellroy intended for it to
do the opposite.
One of the flaws of the novel is mainly a failure of a pay-off. King's death was
foreshadowed in the beginning. Wayne was able to project his hatred onto King and it was
reasonable that this emotion stemmed from self-directed hate and guilt for Lynette's murder. His
identity was pliable—he could see himself in random African-Americans and in doing so, he
reacted purely emotionally. After killing Bongo in Vietnam, the emotions lose their power. One
would expect Wayne to be released from this trap, but instead, he attempts to resurrect it. The
emotions are no longer valid, and in a bizarre turn, Wayne attempts to rationalize his irrational
emotions, to "hate smart". When Wayne kills Durfee the book seems to oscillate between the
possibilities of his hate and that emotion's failure to register. Before the King assassination,
Ellroy draws parallel's between Wayne and King that are meant to reinvoke the schizophrenia he
suffered at the beginning of the novel:
[Wayne] went to Little Rock. He enforced integration. He saw King there. He saw
that fuck film. It was FBI-shit. He saw King there. He killed three coloreds. King indicted

Las Vegas. King almost went there. He killed Bongo in Saigon. King hated his war. He
killed Wendell Durfee. Wayne Senior found Durfee. King served his vengeance cause.
Wayne Senior knew:
You want it. I made you. It's yours. (629)
The connections are mostly unconvincing and in this sense, it works. If it was intended to be
unconvincing, then it reads as if Wayne, in order to give his actions meaning draws parallels that
don't exist. Moments before King's assassination, Wayne watches King through binoculars,
"Wayne got King's eyes. Wayne got King's skin". The use of the word "got" rather than the word
"saw" is significant. The word "got" implies a receiving. Wayne projected Durfee, a symbol of
his own self-hatred, onto King and now King's features are projected back onto Wayne. As
Wayne watches King on the balcony, "Wayne ran outtakes. Wayne saw that fuck film. The
mattress jiggles. King's flab rolls. That ashtray drops." The language repeats after Ray shoots
King, "Wayne saw the impact. Wayne saw the neck spray. Wayne saw King drop" (638). Wayne
juxtaposes the FBI film and King's death, sending him back to the film. It is uncertain whether it
returns him to the viewing where he ruined Chuck Rogers' screening or the moment after
Lynette's funeral where he projected Durfee onto King. If King's death is intended to return him
to the former, it brings him back to when he was progressive. If is intended to return him to the
latter, it means nothing had changed in Wayne, which the text doesn't support. After King's
death, the conspirators planned on overdosing Ray and leaving a suicide note. However, Wayne
destroys the evidence and misleads the authorities. Letting Ray escape screws up the
conspirators' plan. Instead of the self-contained story of a crazy white man shooting King and
committing suicide, what happens is that a crazy white man assassinated King and evaded the
authorities. The murder sparks riots and the coverage cause the Poor People's March to fail. The
news reports then replay the negative image of African-Americans that was once used to justify
their repression.

Before the assassination, Littell imagines "Martin Luther/1532. It's Europe aflame.
There's the Pope. He's Mr. Hoover. His old world's aflame." He then thinks, "Retire me. I want to
watch. I want to watch passively." (576) It's a schizophrenic response to the changing world:
"Leave me alone." In schizoanalysis, this is considered a breakthrough. After the breakthrough,
one is to move beyond this realization by returning to society and liberating it. Littell is still
engaged despite his desire for an escape. Right up until the end, he continues to liason between
Hughes and the Mafia and still represents the Mafia in their various engagements. He still spies
on the SCLC for the FBI and still attempts to help Rustin and King. He also begins helping a
Kennedy staffer with Robert Kennedy's election behind Hoover's back. He has to be different
people in different situations and his pliability exhausts him.
His suicide is foreshadowed when he reads the famous blackmail threat sent by the FBI
to King (577). It is only alluded to in the novel, but the end of it fits with Littell's trajectory:
"King, there is only one thing left for you to do. You know what this is. You have 34 days in
which to do…You are done. There is but one way out for you. You better take it before your
filthy, abnormal, fraudulent self is bared to the nation" (Keady). The letter was sent with
evidence of his infidelity. In the novel, Littell, after discovering King's socialist scheme, begins
feeding data to Paul Horvitz, a young Kennedy aide. Littell dresses in a fake beard and affects a
fey Southern accent. He tries to assist Robert F. Kennedy with a future anti-Mob campaign.
Hoover catches him. As Littell waits for Paul he overhears three men (all secretly FBI agents)
watching the King riots on television, saying, "Goddamn animals…We gave them their civil
rights…And look what we got." They gloat over the success of white oppression. Paul arrives
and attacks Littell and tells him that a federal agent showed Kennedy a picture of Littell (642).
The only encounter Littell ever had with Kennedy was when, in American Tabloid, he

blackmailed Kennedy with evidence of a Mafia-Kennedy election. John F. Kennedy's
assassination was meant to confirm the Mafia's authority over the presidency. At the scene of
Robert Kennedy's assassination, Littell attempts to save him, but is knocked out by the
conspirators. His past fraudulence catches up to him and negates his potential to save Kennedy.
He is trapped and unable to move beyond his schizophrenic breakthrough. When Littell
discovers Kennedy has been assassinated, "Ward cupped his ears. Ward shut his eyes. Ward
fucking screamed" (667). The last sentence echoes the final line in American Tabloid, as if the
scream Pete expects to hear from Barb comes out of Ward's mouth. Pete helps him hide in Lake
Tahoe and tells him that the same men who killed Kennedy were responsible for King's death.
Littell turns on the television:
Littell flipped channels. Littell caught The Triad: Jack/King/Bobby. Three funeral
shots. Three artful cuts. Three widows framed.
I killed them. It's my fault. Their blood's on me.
He waited. He watched the screen. Let's try for all three. He flipped channels. He
got one and two. He lucked on all three.
There—old footage. It's pre-'63.
They're in the White House. Jack's at his desk. King's standing with Bobby. The
image held. One picture/all three.
Littell grabbed the gun. Littell ate the barrel. The muzzle roar shut off all three.
(669).
Littell waits for a moment where all three victims, all of whom he both helped and harmed are
located in one frame. In each case, he engaged with them through different identities. By placing
them in a single frame he encapsulates the different lives he lived in different moments of time.
Killing himself at the moment freezes that unification. Littell's freedom through death isn't
revolutionary. It offers nothing to society. However, by calling attention to the past, Ellroy paints
a picture of white power in America. Littell is symptomatic of the problems and there is value in
his attempts to extract himself from the chaos and reenter it. He's the rare character who attempts

to do right. Littell's trajectory, I think, is one of the novels strengths. With the character, Ellroy
successfully captures the stakes and costs of the world and time he engages with.
The same, unfortunately, can't be said of the denouement. Wayne returns home and the
end paints him as a Deleuze-Guattarian neurotic. He is told about some of the revelations in the
plot (the Pete-in-Vietnam plotline) and declares, "I just don't care" (654). It's the apathy that was
described in the Bongo killing and unintentionally shows in the Durfee killing. He desires only to
be with his cancer-ridden stepmother Janice. What sets him down the path towards redemption is
an epiphany that comes right out of the blue. He calls his mother and "lies his life off." She tells
him, "You were a tender child. You loved animals. You set trapped coyotes free. You were a
brilliant child…You carried no hate. You played with colored children. You loved righteously"
(655). Of course, the question is, If Wayne was so damned virtuous and intelligent, why did he
do so many awful and stupid things? It is one of the major problems in the text. Then, there's
what truly forces him to go back into society. His mother tells him, "I was pregnant once. It was
'32—two years before you. Wayne Senior had a dream. He saw the baby as a girl. He wanted a
boy. He beat my stomach in. He used brass knuckles. The baby died. Wayne Senior was right. It
was a girl. The doctor told me" (655). It's a late epiphany. In the last few pages of the novel,
Wayne discovers one of Littell's love-interest's anti-Mafia files and mails it to Mafioso Carlos
Marcello. He plans on replacing Littell as the liason between the mob and Howard Hughes. Over
the course of the novel, something in him produces a flow of desire that calls for his selfdestruction (manifested in his early suicide attempt). In the end, he supposedly masters it and
directs it towards his father. He asks Janice, "If I told you I could help you settle the one score
that counts, would you want to do it?" She says yes. Wayne chains his father to a rail, and Janice
kills him with a golf club. By killing his father, Wayne resolves an Oedipal complex that was

never taken that seriously. He joins the white power structure in earnest and represses evidence
of its corruption. In this reading, Ellroy gives us a downer of an ending, but the execution doesn't
necessarily work. The pacing of Wayne's storyline slackens by the time he kills Durfee. There is
a disconnect between the emotions we are expected to feel and the rendering of the event on the
page. The play for redemption at the end is unearned—the reader is told that Wayne is a good
person, but the events don't confirm that opinion. In a schizoanalytic reading, the ending makes
sense. However, Wayne's swelling of love towards his mother and step-mother is meant to be
read as genuine. The killing of Wayne's father is intended to be redemptive, if mordantly so.
James Ellroy's The Cold Six Thousand may be the most flawed book in the trilogy. It's an
attempt to describe the psychology of the America in the Sixties and to rightfully capture the
violence of its history. Ellroy extends the themes of identity and persona. Instead of subverting
tropes and expectations for comic and critical effect, significantly raises the stakes by locating
them in political struggle. The book diagnoses the illness in American society and, for the most
part, manages to convincingly present the symptoms. However, for the characters, there is no
real escape from the entrapping forces Americans are subjected to. There is only the failure of
their attempts. If Ellroy intended Wayne's outcome as a solution, it doesn't work. The roots of it
are fantastic (the uncanny Wendell Durfee), the way the scenario unfolds requires a strong
stomach and a healthy suspension of disbelief, and the outcome is unearned. Ellroy was
attempting an entirely cynical novel (which is the attempt in American Tabloid), but that he
imagined an escape and failed to execute it convincingly. It's a problem Ellroy fixes in the final
novel, where he moves beyond merely diagnosing the problems, but examines the possibilities
outside of them.

Works Cited
Cunningham, David. "Understanding State Responses to Left-versus Right-Wing Threats: The
FBI's Repression of the New Left and the Ku Klux Klan." Social Science History. 27.3
(2003). 327-20. JSTOR. Web.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. New York:
Viking, 1977. Print.
Ellroy, James. American Tabloid. New York: Vintage, 2001. Print.
---Blood's a Rover. New York: Vintage, 2010. Print
---The Cold Six Thousand: a Novel. New York: Vintage, 2002. Print.
Freud, Sigmund. "The Uncanny." Trans. Alex Strachey. Standard Edition. London: Hogarth,
1953. 219-52. Reserve Web. Web. 8 Apr. 2011.
Ignatiev, Noel. "The Point Is Not To Interpret Whiteness But To Abolish It." Race Traitor:
Journal of the New Abolitionism (1997). Race Traitor. Web. 20 Mar. 2011.
Keady, Jim. "Do You Really Want To Celebrate Martin Luther King, Jr.?" The Huffington Post.
17 Jan. 2011. Web. 18 Apr. 2011.
Neff, D. S. "Anoedipal Fiction: Schizoanalysis and The Black Dahlia." Poetics Today. 18.3
(1997): 301-42. JSTOR. Web. 28 Nov. 2010.
Smith, Daniel W. "Deleuze and the Question of Desire: Toward an Immanent Theory of
Ethics." Parrhesia Journal 2 (2007): 66-78. Parrhesia Journal. Open Humanities Press.
Web. 15 Apr. 2011.
Ryan, Tim. "'One Shiny Bleach Job': The Power of Whiteness in James Ellroy's American
Tabloid." Journal of American Culture 27.3 (2004): 271-279. MLA International
Bibliography. EBSCO. Web. 22 Apr. 2011.

Conclusion
In American Tabloid and The Cold Six Thousand, the narrative voice mimics the voice of
the white power structure. In American Tabloid, for instance, Lenny Sands' delight at mocking
Hoover with his satirical tabloid article is told through Hoover's point of view. Likewise,
reactions to Sands' suicide are limited to an anonymous Justice Department agent and two
mobsters who dismiss it. In The Cold Six Thousand, the voice screams the word "nigger" for
Wayne, then proceeds to tell us that he "never condoned the concept." Throughout both novels
(especially the second), one has to ask, as author Norman Rush does in his review of the trilogy,
"For Christ sake, who is telling this story?" ("Fever Dreams of Your FBI") The answer is given
in Blood's a Rover, and at first glance it doesn't seem to work. The voice is revealed to be Don
Crutchfield's, a private investigator and one of the three protagonists. He is a voyeur, obsessive,
and virgin fixated equally on finding his lost mother, the victim of a murder he investigates, and
the character Joan Klein. He is constantly referred to by an assortment of nicknames: Crutch
(most commonly), Dipshit, Peeper, pariguayo (literally Dominican for "party-watcher" but in
slang approximates to "Dipshit"), the kid, and the boy. He is a schizophrenic character in the
Deleuze-Guattarian sense: he's a fringe personality who exists outside of society and is purely
driven by his desire to find his lost mother through various women. He is forced into society by
the oppressive forces in the novel. He ends up in Haiti where he becomes schizophrenic in the
delusory sense—he begins to hear voices and he experiences the world as a disembodied entity.
Through a look at the formal construction of the novel, specifically at the book's epilogue, the
revelation casts the entire trilogy in an intriguing light.
The epilogue of Blood's a Rover provides an optimistic coda that, upon unpacking, is
completely mad. There is an incongruency between what Crutch says and the information the

reader brings to it. Crutchfield gives an explanation for all the document inserts that are
incorporated into each of the novels:
Documents have arrived at irregular intervals. They are always anonymously sent. I
have compiled diary excerpts, oral-history transcripts and police-file overflow. Elderly
leftists and black militants have told me their stories and provided verification. Freedom
of Information Act subpoenas have served me well. (637)
The research he compiles is largely untrustworthy—documents have anonymous sources, the
sources (diaries and oral-history transcripts) are subjective. The novel, prior to the ending, paints
a picture of leftist revolutionaries as well meaning but insane. Police-file overflows, given the
portraits of cops and FBI agents the trilogy provides, are probably the least trustworthy sources
of all.
In the first two novels, there's a superego that orders the information made available to
us. Information that isn't provided in the narration is given through document inserts. In
American Tabloid, the document inserts are newspaper headlines, Hush-Hush articles, FBI
memos, surveillance transcripts, Hoover's official phone conversations, and letters between the
main players. A good deal of them is marked with "Extremely Confidential" notices or reminders
to destroy the file. The documents the white power structure's—mainstream media, Hughes'
tabloid, and the surveillance material all serve to show the inner workings, motives, and opinions
between the different centers of power. By the second novel, as explained in the previous
chapter, hate tracts are included with official documents. In changing times, the lines within the
white power structure are redrawn. Players within the structure indulge maniacs and their ravings
in order to save it. If one were to look at the white power structure as one psychology, the
document inserts are the mental noise, the communications between various synapses that
constitute a working entity.

If the document inserts represent the voices of the white power structure, then Hoover is
the most dominant figure in it. The mafia has given up on the civil rights front, preferring to
work with black criminal organizations rather than oppose them. Hughes has gone insane. Most,
if not all, the memos and transcripts in the novels were recorded by the FBI. Hoover only has a
few physical appearances in American Tabloid and is a disembodied voice in The Cold Six
Thousand. In Blood's a Rover, Hoover is fading: "The old poof was frail. He slurped his soup
palsy-style. He'd lost some beats, his brain still sparked, his circuits cranked on HATE" (30). The
narration continues, "He was seventy-three. His breath reeked. His cuticles bled. He lived off
digitalis and skin-pop amphetamine. A Dr. Feelgood supplied daily injections" (31). This is
further reflected in the inserts that appear. Instead of official transcripts, the inserts are composed
of personal diaries from subjected groups that were curiously silent in the first two novels. The
diaries belong to two liberal women Joan Klein and Karen Sifakis, and gay black undercover cop
Marshall Bowen. The points of view shift by the end of the novel to the point of anarchy. Along
with Joan, Karen, Marsh, and Crutchfield (through first-person narration) take over the novel. A
limited third-person narrative slowly gives way to first-person perspectives. Joan and Marsh's
diaries, juxtaposed, summarize the plot and the fictive trajectory of the novel.
This isn’t to say that the diaries are respites from the novel's madness. Joan Klein, a
radical leftist who has helped plot Communist revolutions across the globe, are genuinely
unnerving. Joan assists Dwight Holly and the FBI in disseminating heroin to the black nationalist
groups the Black Tribe Alliance and the Mau Mau Liberation Front who then sell the drugs to
poor black neighborhoods. Joan targets the organizations because of their corruption. The goal is
to discredit the Black Panthers, the most organized and least corrupt of the militants. Written in
"slashing block print":

The FBI's short-term goal is a sedated black populace; its long term goal is the
perpetuation of racial servitude. I want the BTA and MMLF to move heroin. I will risk
the short-term probability of squalor in fervent hope that the sustained depravity of heroin
will lead to a rich expression of racial identity and ultimately to political revelation and
revolt. In that sense, I see honor, hope and beauty where Dwight does not. (304-5)
Her heart is in the right place, though her mind is somewhere off in a romantic fantasy. In a later
diary, Joan writes, "I have seen and done horrifying things in my long revolutionary struggle; my
deployment of heroin in Algeria in '56 proved ambiguous. I sternly trust that any and all conflicts
in this journey will resolve in my favor, not Dwight's and that no human beings will die" (321-2).
This is the definition of insanity, repeating the same action and expecting different results. Late
in the novel, Dwight has an apostasy and he and Joan begin to plot the assassination of J. Edgar
Hoover, who specifically targeted her family for being liberal subversives. What is significant
about Joan's diaries is that they are incorporated into the narrative when she is on the side of the
white power structure. Her diaries disappear after the destruction of the BTA and MMLF, though
she continues to play a significant role in the events of the plot.
The collapse of the black militant movement is told through the perspective of Marshall
Bowen. His journals recall previous characters like Lenny Sands and Kemper Boyd. Because of
his race, sexuality, and occupation he has to split himself between different groups with changing
demands. As a cop, he has to imitate the white power structure. Undercover, he has to imitate
radical blacks. An early journal reads:
I critiqued the institutional racism of the LAPD specifically and white racist America in
general and was conscious that I was shucking [the militants] as I did it, as I concurrently
believed it and did not believe it…In retrospect, it felt like demagoguery, social analysis
and apostolic fervor all rolled into one.
Marsh mockingly performs the language of black militancy to black militants. He camps
revolutionary fervor yet begins to believe in it at the same time. In both worlds, he has to repress
his homosexuality, as neither groups condone his sexual preference. When Wayne finds out, he

writes, "How did I reveal myself?...I am not in the least effeminate and have always gone to
great lengths to rid myself of the affect that men with the Bent generally possess. Do I
swish?...Do I lisp? Are my shit-kicking/black male mannerisms butch queer in some codified
manner?" (366). Marsh identifies his homosexuality as "the Bent," a phrase that internalizes the
social construction of a gay identity as deviant. Within this social construct, he becomes the
oppressor: "I roust fags…and carry weighted sap gloves for the task. I have a rule: any fag who
lisps or swishes too persistently in my presence receives a beating." He then adds, "I'm a cop"
(469). He performs heterosexuality and white authority and punishes homosexuals for a
perceived failure in their performance.
It is only when he extricates himself from American society that he sees all the
movements of his and shifts in his identity. He gets the sense early on that he exists in a dream
state when he notices ties between his undercover work and the armed-car robbery that obsesses
him. The truck contained emeralds, which serve as the McGuffin (the item of mystery that drives
the plot) of the novel. The emeralds are a shadow economy in the novel, first belonging to Joan
Klein's family (they bought them off of left-wing Colombian rebels), stolen by Hoover, then
stolen again by Reginald Hazzard, a young black man, who absconds to Haiti. Hazzard, a
Deleuze-Guattarian revolutionary, sends the emeralds to poor blacks in America. The
incongruence of events causes him to believe that he exists in a dream state, a mental space
where "souls [are] in flux" (530). He follows the emeralds to Reginald Hazzard in Haiti. He
discovers a mind-altering substance (named after Wayne):
It is the most breathless mindscape. I often see faces out of my past in entirely altered
forms. I think of my life as a middle-class black kid, a left-wing poseur, a policeman, a
homosexual, a faux black militant and a killer. I live in a contemplative and unburdened
state. February 24, 1964 [the date of the armored car robbery], and everything I have
done to claim profit from it feels entirely irrelevant (563).

Marsh comes to terms with his identities and is able to reconcile the diverse experiences each
entailed. The scene recalls the scene when Littell sees the three important men who were affected
negatively by his multiple personas and grief-stricken, shoots himself in the head. Marsh is able
to step back and contemplate. Marsh later gives himself up peacefully to the angels of death,
Haitian men with bird wings where their right arms should be. The men appear in the novel once
before and are never explained. They are part of the mystical world that inform the events of the
novel. In the previous two books, the plots though intricate, unfolded in a mostly logical pattern.
One event precipitates another, which precipitates another.
The mystical elements, the voodoo, the dream states, and the angels of death, which show
up with greater frequency as the book moves on confound the order. When Wayne frees Haitian
slaves in the Dominican Republic, winged men come out of nowhere and murder him. When
Crutchfield discovers who killed the woman in the case he investigates early on, he uses an
herbal concoction to kill her murderer. Finally, Crutchfield learns that Hoover targeted Joan's
family for three generations and that she and Dwight considered assassinating him, but scrapped
the project. Crutchfield breaks into Hoover's home and discovers the FBI director's secret hoard
of FBI files. "A million voices said, 'Dipshit, Peeper, pariguayo.' He covered his ears. It didn't
stop them. The voices beat on him. He sat on the floor and let them yell themselves out" (633).
He uses chemical compounds to burn the files and sees Hoover. "Crutch reached in his pocket
and pulled out the emerald. Mr. Hoover trembled and homed in on it. The sparkle was incessant.
It eyeball-magnetized. The green glow grew and grew. Mr. Hoover weaved and drooled. Mr.
Hoover clutched his chest and staggered upstairs. (634)" Upon seeing the Hoover's files, a
compilation of the voices of oppression, he experiences a schizophrenic attack. He lets it pass,
then holds up a unit of the book's shadow economy. Hoover has a heart attack, then dies. Ellroy,

retroactively, draws a new frame around the trilogy. The narrative voice is Crutchfield's persona.
When Hoover dies, Crutchfield takes his place as the ordering authority of the trilogy. He
reinvests repressed voices back into historical narrative.

Works Cited
Rush, Norman. ""Fever Dreams of Your FBI"" New York Review of Books 10 May 09. The
Huffington Post. 10 May 2009. Web. 27 Sept. 2010.
Ellroy, James. Blood's a Rover. New York: Vintage, 2010. Print.

