Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2013

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2013

Journeys into the Unknown: Fairy Figures as
Catalysts of Mortal Motion
Leon Isaac Husock
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Husock, Leon Isaac, "Journeys into the Unknown: Fairy Figures as Catalysts of Mortal Motion" (2013). Senior Projects Spring 2013.
Paper 177.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2013/177

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2013 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Journeys into the Unknown:
Fairy Figures as Catalysts of Mortal Motion
Senior Project Submitted to
The Division of Language and Literature

By
Leon Husock

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2013

Acknowledgements
Thank you to my mother, who read me Tolkien at such a young age she refused to believe I could
actually follow it. And to my father, who taught me to think critically, and that you should
always want to learn more about something you’re interested in. Thank you to my adviser,
Maria, for always pushing me to look a little deeper into what I was reading and think a little
harder about what I was writing. Thanks to all my friends for pretending to be interested when I
had an epiphany and just had to tell someone about it. Oh, and many thanks to Sarah, whose
Senior Project survival kit got me through that final week.

Table of Contents
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………….1
Chapter One……………………………………………………………………………4
Chapter Two…………………………………………………………………………...34
Chapter Three………………………………………………………………………….60
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………..87

Introduction

It is a long-standing idea, both in folklore and more recently in the genre of fantasy, that
Names, capital N, have power. When you know something’s true Name you have power over it,
can bend it to your will. While this may not function in the same magical sense in our world (I
will not say the ‘real world’, for just because something is not fact does not make it unreal),
nevertheless it remains true that words and names have a great deal of power. Annalisa Castaldo,
in her essay “No More Yielding Than A Dream: Shakespeare in ‘The Sandman’” writes that,
“Shakespeare wears well, in part, because he can be accessorized. Culture can keep reinventing
Shakespeare to suit its needs, all the while pretending nothing has changed.”1 This is because the
name, the word Shakespeare, as belonging to a prominent member, if not the leader, of the
Western Canon for the last four hundred years, brings to mind a specific set of images,
impressions, and feelings. These impressions are unique to Shakespeare, and any other name or
word would not, could not, conjure the same mental mark. Thus any author, by evoking the
name of Shakespeare in a character, immediately presents the reader with a foundational image,
an outline if you will, of that character. The author is free to color things in, to shade, as he sees
fit, especially when factual details are scarce, but the outline remains the same.
The longer something persists in the collective living memory, the stronger its Name, and
the mental outline that name evokes, becomes. Tolkien writes, “The radical distinction between
all art (including drama) that offers a visible presentation and true literature is that it imposes one
visible form. Literature works from mind to mind and is thus more progenitive. It is at once

1

Castaldo, Annalisa, “‘No More Yielding than a Dream’: The Construction of Shakespeare in ‘The
Sandman.’” College Literature, Vol. 31, No. 4, Shakespeare and Popular Culture (Fall, 2004), p. 95
1

more universal and more poignantly particular. If it speaks of bread or wine or stone or tree, it
appeals to the whole of these things, to their ideas;”2. This is indeed true, but the power of
Naming fails to live up to its potential if one thinks of it only in terms of stones and trees;
common-place things, things both physically real and not of man’s creation. While it is true that
my outline for ‘stone’ is not the same as someone else’s, the two can only differ so much because
their basis in immutable fact is so strong. The true power of Names, as I have described it, lies in
constructed outlines with little to no basis in reality. Details of Shakespeare’s life are sparse at
best, but nevertheless the invocation of the name, of the character, brings to mind a distinct
feeling.
Shakespeare, however, did exist; he lived, he wrote, ate, drank, slept, breathed. What of a
being that does none of these things, but has scattered itself across the Western canon, had its
name and outline conjured into readers’ minds time and time again for six hundred years and
more? I am speaking, of course, of fairies; fairies, which have no basis in the factual world, no
biographical details or concrete physical attributes. Nevertheless, the word carries with it a
powerful outline. But has that outline always been the same? And what purpose, once invoked,
do these fairies serve? As beings with no physical form they must, one imagines, perform some
function in literature in order to be called up as they are, again and again.
Often in modern times when people think of fairies, the first image that comes to mind
bears a strong resemblance to J.M. Barrie's creation Tinkerbell, the tiny, butterfly-winged
companion of the titular character from his beloved work, Peter Pan. And while Tinkerbell was
hardly the first miniature, winged fairy in literature to enjoy the company of humans, she is far

2

Tolkien, J. R. R. “On Fairy Stories.” The Monsters and the Critics: The Essays of J.R.R. Tolkien.
London: HarperCollins, 1997. Print. p. 159
2

from the quintessential fairy, and bears almost no resemblance whatsoever to the beings that bore
the same name four- or five-hundred years before her time. Fairies of the Middle Ages were an
altogether different brood; fierce, mysterious and secretive, and above all not to be trifled with.
Barrie's iconic creation and her ilk have as much to do with these beings as a bird does a
dinosaur: there is a tenuous lineal connection, but unless one were to trace the evolution of the
thing one would never believe the two had ever been related.
How is it, then, that the same name can be applied to both? Because, in their simplest
form, literary fairies perform much the same function from century to century: they serve as
physical agents of the greater concept of the unknown, acting to draw the human characters of
their story away from the known world, from the spaces on the map that have been charted, and
into that wilderness that is yet unknown. Diane Purkiss writes in her book on fairies, At the
Bottom of the Garden, that “Fairies are born of...fear. The blank spaces on the village map, too,
need to be filled; faced with woods and mountains, seas and streams that could never be fully
charted, human beings saw blanks, blanks they hastened to fill with a variety of beings all given
different names, yet all recognizable as fairies.”3 I posit that every change the fairy undergoes in
literature, and there have been many changes, is one which better enables them to fulfill their
function in the face of changing heroes. After all, a man of the 21st century, or the 19th, cannot
be expected to have the same reactions as one of the 14th. Fairies change because we change,
and every change they undergo allows them to continue to play their role, pulling us out and
away, for whatever reason, from the things we know.

3

Purkiss, Diana. At the Bottom of the Garden: A History of Fairies, Hobgoblins and Other Troublesome
Things. New York, NY: New York University Press, 2001. Print. p. 11
3

Chapter 1

In order to better understand the process of fairy evolution, so to speak, we must first
examine what literary evidence we have of fairies from the Middle Ages. Fairies in writing from
this era, however are more elusive than their Victorian descendants, if only because extant
written works grow scarcer the farther into antiquity one delves. Many of the manuscripts from
the era are incomplete, or exist only in one extant copy, or survive only through oral tradition.
Unlike many of their more modern contemporaries, fairies from the Middle Ages were not
merely the idle dream of a novelist; they were inextricably linked to folklore, and this makes
them difficult to trace and harder to pin down. But fortunately we are left with a handful of
works intact (or nearly so), dating roughly to the 13th and early 14th centuries, which feature
fairies in prominent roles. It is to these that we now turn in our study of medieval fairies. Of the
works that remain in the present day we will examine three of the best known and most studied:
Sir Orfeo, a Middle English poem re-telling the Greek Orpheus myth in the form of a romance;
Tam Lin, a ballad of the Scottish borderlands most famously transcribed in more than a dozen
variants by Francis James Child in the 19th century; and last and perhaps best-known and most
studied, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, a Middle English romance believed to have been
written around the late 14th century by an anonymous poet.
Each of these stories has a number of elements in common with the others, chief among
them being a mortal protagonist and a fairy antagonist. Each begins in some way with an
interaction between the two, initiated by the fairy antagonist. This provokes a response from the
hero which, most importantly, leads him (or her, in the case of Tam Lin) away from the civilized

4

world and into the unknown wilds. Here he has a confrontation of some sort with the fairy
antagonist who we see to be strikingly similar in various ways to the protagonist himself, as well
as living in a world which bears a strong resemblance to the world of the protagonist. However,
this resemblance is always slightly skewed, somehow off, like a reflection in a mirror; at first
glance it is identical, but upon closer inspection it proves to be backwards. These subtle
differences evoke the concept which Freud referred as "das unheimliche" or "the uncanny" in his
seminal essay of the same name. Freud describes the uncanny as “that class of the terrifying
which leads back to something long known to us, once very familiar.”4 Of course, Freud also
states that uncanniness cannot be applied to fairy stories in the same way it can to realism. This,
however, though Freud himself fails to say as much, is because the examples Freud cites of
instances which would ordinarily produce an uncanny effect (the resurrection of the dead, the
animation of inanimate objects, instantaneous wish fulfillment, etc) are facilitated in fairy tales
via a willing suspension of disbelief on the part of the reader; because there is a basic assumption
that such things are possible in fairy-tales, when they do take place the effect it produces is not
uncanny. This is not the case in the medieval fairy stories (which is to say stories involving
fairies) which this chapter proposes to discuss. Everything about the treatment of fairies and
their magic in these texts, as we will see, suggests that the human characters are thoroughly taken
aback by it. Of equal interest to us is something which Freud passes over rather quickly,
however: the literal translation of the German word unheimlich. Unheimlich means “not of the
home”, and these fairies most certainly are not. They are, at their core, personifications of that

4

Freud, Sigmund. (1919h). Das Unheimliche. Imago, 5: 297-324; GW, 12: 229-268; The "uncanny," SE,
17: 217-256
5

wild unknown mentioned above; of darkness, madness, death, and above all of Nature. 5 In the
medieval texts of this chapter there is a certain sense of being surrounded by uncharted
wilderness, unknown and unknowable. The protagonists’s purpose, once he is engaged by the
fairy adversary, is to defend against an incursion by that wildness into the civilised world;
likewise, the purpose of the fairy element is to draw the mortal protagonist away from the manmade world of court, castle, and chivalry and into the wilderness. In all three texts the world of
the protagonist is encroached upon by the fairy element, causing the protagonist to leave said
world and enter the unknown in order to defend against it. Ultimately this does not make the
wilderness knowable, it merely makes it manageable. These medieval protagonists do not seek
to understand the unknown, only to defeat it. However, to this end it must be given an
embodiment, a face, so to speak, and I posit that it is for this reason that the fairy element in
medieval texts so strongly resembles its mortal counterpart. The heroes have given it the face
they know best: their own. This veneer of similarity, however, is inescapably underlain by the
knowledge of otherness, and it is these two aspects that produce the uncanny effect of medieval
fairies. In order to better understand this we will examine the aforementioned texts, beginning
with the earliest, Sir Orfeo, found in the Auchinleck Manuscript which has been dated to circa
1330 AD.
Orfeo tells the story of a king, the titular character, who loves two things: harp music and
his wife, Heurodys. When the queen is kidnapped by the Fairy King, Orfeo, unable to bear his
failure to protect his wife, leaves his kingdom in self-imposed exile and enters the wilderness.
There he eventually happens upon the fairy retinue and follows it back to Faerie, where he plays

5

Purkiss, Diane. At the Bottom of the Garden: A Dark History of Fairies, Hobgoblins, and Other
Troublesome Things. New York: New York UP, 2005. Print.
6

his harp for the king so beautifully that the fairy grants him a boon, which Orfeo uses to reclaim
his queen and return home. Already in this brief summary we can see similarities between the
humans and the fairies, but in order to fully appreciate them we must look in more depth.
One of the most significant recurring themes in Sir Orfeo is the similarity not just of
fairies to humans, but of the Fairy King to Orfeo, the mortal king. The fairies in the poem enjoy
many of the same pastimes as their human royal counterparts, something we see clearly in these
two characters. In the very beginning, the poet writes of Orfeo,
Orfeo mest of ani thing
Lovede the gle of harping.
Siker was everi gode harpour
Of him to have miche honour.6
Not only does he provide hospitality but specifically honour as well, showing both love and
respect for the minstrel's trade. We see this hospitality mirrored at the climax of the story, when
Orfeo begs the minstrel's right of audience with the Fairy King and is ultimately rewarded for his
skill, just as Orfeo himself would reward a wandering harp player who might appear in his court.
The more telling similarities, though, are in the appearances of the fairy court, first in Queen
Heurodys' dream, and then on several separate occasions in the real world.
When Heurodys awakes from her dream, maddened with fear, the whole court is put into
an uproar. Specific mention is made of numbers of people. Sixty maidens or more come to her
aid; Orfeo arrives with ten knights. In Heurodys’ dream she is approached first by two fair
knights, fully armed, who insist that she accompany them to see their king. She refuses, and

6

Laskaya, Anne, and Eve Salisbury, eds. "Sir Orfeo." Teams Middle English Texts Series. University of
Rochester, n.d. Web. 28 Apr. 2013. vv. 25-28. (Orfeo most of any thing loved the sound of harp music.
Any good harper who came to his court was sure to be treated well). Please forgive my inelegant
translations of the Middle English.
7

shortly afterwards the Fairy King himself arrives with a retinue of one hundred knights and one
hundred maidens, all riding snow white horses. 7
Among the various details one important thing to note is the size of the Fairy King's
retinue. The Fairy King is able to casually summon up one hundred maidens and knights just to
speak with the queen, more than Orfeo has been shown to possess heretofore. This establishes
the beginning of a pattern of oneupmanship, in which the Fairy King’s power and wealth are
ultimately shown to be greater than those of mortals. Once Heurodys has delivered the fairy's
message, however, Orfeo sets a guard about her of a full thousand knights, proving that he has
might to equal that of the Fairy King8 . Later on, after Orfeo's thousand knights are powerless to
stop the Fairy King from kidnapping the queen, Orfeo in his self-imposed exile encounters the
Fairy King and court firsthand.
Other while he might him se
As a gret ost bi him te,
Wele atourned, ten hundred knightes,
Ich y-armed to his rightes,
Of cuntenaunce stout and fers,
With mani desplaid baners. 9
The Fairy King rides to war with a thousand fully-armed knights (which raises some interesting
questions in itself. Against whom does the King of Faerie ride to war?), the exact size of the
guard which Orfeo places around Heurodys before her capture. This, and all the appearances of
the Fairy King's court, are a clear and deliberate measure of his power by a mortal standard. This
allows the Fairy King’s power to be gauged by a metric which Orfeo can understand, and one
7

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 135-145.

8

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 180-184

9

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 289-294. (Other times he might see a great host of a thousand knights, well-armed, of
countenance stout and fierce, riding with banners as if to war.)
8

which applies to him as well. In theory, if fairies were possessed of supernatural powers, one
might imagine that they would not need strength in numbers; however, because Orfeo’s men do
not have magical abilities, neither does the fairy host. This is yet another instance in which the
king of the Otherworld mirrors Orfeo, the mortal king, specifically in numbers of people listed.
Whenever a number of either maidens or knights is given in reference to one of the courts, it is
used again later for the retinue of the other. Orfeo places a thousand-knight guard on
Heurodys10; the Fairy King rides to war with a thousand-knight army 11. When Heurodys awakes
distraught from her dream she is immediately attended by sixty maidens 12; the fairy hawking
company that Orfeo encounters in the wood is composed of sixty maidens 13.
In addition to the size of the fairies' retinue, they share certain pastimes and hobbies with
the human elites of the time, the courtly nobles. During his decade of self-imposed exile, Orfeo
witnesses the fairies several times, not only going to war but also enjoying themselves. He
witnesses fairy knights and ladies dancing and making music on pipes 14, sees the Fairy King out
on a hunt with hounds and a hunting party 15, and finally happens to encounter a group of fairy
maidens, among them his own queen, out hawking for sport, hunting water fowl.16

10

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 182-184

11

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 289-292

12

“Sir Orfeo”, v. 90

13

“Sir Orfeo”, v. 304. Note: While it is true that the text gives the number of maidens as "sexti and mo",
meaning that there could have been more than sixty. As the story is fictional there is no 'true' number of
maidens, therefore the real significance lies in the numbers given by the author and their repetition.
14

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 297-303

15

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 283-286

16

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 304-309
9

The fairies Orfeo happens upon, when not at war, enjoy spending their time making
music, dancing, and hunting, much like the medieval mortal nobility.17 When describing the
fairy revels that Orfeo happens to encounter the author specifically states that there was present
"al maner menstracy"18, which is to say all manner of minstrelsy. The use of the word minstrelsy
is a telling one, as the minstrel's art is important to the plot as well as being shown and stated to
be a passion of both Orfeo and the Fairy King. The presence of "menstracy" in the fairy revels
serves to reinforce yet again the parallels between the two monarchs, but all of these activities
can be safely assumed to be activities in which Orfeo himself would partake in his free time. In
general, fairies of the Fairy King’s court, presumably nobles themselves, seem to take pleasure in
all of the same activities that please their mortal equivalents. They are not portrayed as alien,
supernatural monsters, but rather they mirror the human nobility. There are the parallels in
number of knights and maidens, a shared appreciation for minstrelsy and harp music, but perhaps
most importantly, Orfeo and the Fairy King desire the same woman. It is stated early on in the
poem that Heurodys is not just Orfeo's queen but his true love and a source of great joy for him.
In the aftermath of Heurodys' vision, Orfeo is informed of the situation and goes to his queen's
chamber to ask her what has upset her so. At length, she answers.
'Allas, mi lord, Sir Orfeo!
Sethen we first togider were,
Ones wroth never we nere;
Bot ever ich have yloved the
As mi liif and so thou me;
Ac now we mot delen ato;
Do thi best, for y mot go.'
'Allas!' quath he, 'Forlorn icham!
17

Coulton, G.G. Social Life in Britain from the Conquest to the Reformation. London: Cambridge
University Press, 1918. 395-96, 404, 409. Print.
18

“Sir Orfeo”, v. 302
10

Whider wiltow go, and to wham?
Whider thou gost, ichil with the,
And whider y go, thou schalt with me.’ 19.
Heurodys is preparing to tell Orfeo of her vision in which the Fairy King assured her that he
would come to take her the next day. She paints a picture of an enduring and loving marriage,
saying that since they were first together they have never once been angry with each other, no
small accomplishment. Orfeo, in turn, is deeply grieved by the prospect of losing his wife.
Rather than dismiss the idea that she will be forced to leave and promise to place her under
heavy guard, Orfeo pledges that wherever she goes he will go with her, despite the fact that his
duties as king would, in theory, keep him at home; in this way he demonstrates that his first
loyalty is to his queen, above even that which he bears for his kingdom. Orfeo demonstrates that
Heurodys is the single most important thing in his life, as we see again later when she is
kidnapped and he places himself in exile. After Heurodys gives Orfeo an account of her dream,
he laments,
'O we!' quath he, 'Allas, allas!
Lever me were to lete mi liif
Than thus to lese the quen, mi wiif!'20
However, for all the similarities between the two monarchs and their respective courts,
the ultimate impression that the Fairy King conveys is one distinctly inhuman and otherworldly.
The centerpiece of this otherness lies in what Orfeo first sees when he enters the courtyard of the
fairy palace. After being granted admission as a minstrel, Orfeo enters the palace courtyard and
19

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 120-130. (Alas, my lord Sir Orfeo! Since we were first together we have never once
fought but ever have I loved thee, and on my life you have loved me. And now we must part; do your
best, for I must go. 'Alas,' quoth he, 'I am forlorn! Where will you go, and to whom? Wherever thou go, I
shall go with thee, and wherever I go you shall be with me.')
20

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 176-178. (Oh woe, quoth he, alas alas! I would rather lose my life than thus to lose my
queen, my wife!)
11

comes upon a gruesome and disturbing sight which contrasts sharply with the beautiful image of
Fairies and their country which the story has painted so far.
Then he gan bihold about al,
And seighe liggeand within the wal
Of folk that were thider y-brought
And thought dede, and nare nought.
Sum stode withouten hade,
And sum non armes nade,
And sum thurth the bodi hadde wounde,
And sum lay wode, y-bounde,
And sum armed on hors sete,
And sum astrangled as thai ete;
And sum were in water adreynt,
And sum with fire al forschreynt.
Wives ther lay on child bedde,
Sum ded and sum awedde,
And wonder fele ther lay bisides
Right as thai slepe her undertides;
Eche was thus in this warld y-nome,
With fairi thider y-come. 21.

The courtyard is full of dead. Not just the dead, but those who have died violently, suddenly, and
unexpectedly. Men who have been maimed or decapitated, who fell from their horses and broke
their necks, who drowned or burned or choked to death. In a standard medieval castle one of the
primary purposes of the courtyard would have been to shelter the people of the surrounding
villages; in times of war, these people would flee their homes with their belongings, livestock,
etc. and seek safety within the walls of the castle in order to stay alive. This provides a
fascinating, if extra-textual (at no point do we actually see villagers sheltering in Orfeo’s castle),

21

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 387-404. (Then he beheld all about within the wall folk that had been brought there,
who had been thought dead. Some stood without head, some without arms, some with mortal wounds,
some armed on horseback, some choked at their meals, some drowned and some burned to death.
Wives on their birthing beds lay there, some dead and some driven mad. Wondrous many were taken
here by fairy enchantment.)
12

contrast, as the courtyard of the Fairy King is filled not with the living, but with the dead, and
specifically with the slain, those whose defenses failed to protect them in life. These dead,
considered to have been taken before their time, are traditionally in the domain of the fairies, and
lying in their midst, asleep under the ympe-tre (a grafted apple tree with magical significance22 ),
is Heurodys.23 These men are not, as one might assume, enemies killed in the midst of an attack
on the fairy castle; it is specifically stated that they have been brought there by enchantment,
"with fairi thider y-come". This line and the fact that Heurodys, who is not dead but kidnapped
by the Fairy King, place the courtyard in an entirely different light. These men appear to be
prizes or trophies, brought to Faerie, like Heurodys, by enchantment. This juxtaposition suggests
that it pleases the Fairy King to have a courtyard full of these dead, much as it pleases him to
have a beautiful woman taken in the same fashion. The presence of these dead is never brought
up again in the poem. It lurks in the background during Orfeo's entire stay in the fairy palace, a
place which in all other respects is one of beauty and opulence. The fairy country itself is
described as being "As bright so sonne on somers day" 24 or as bright as sun on a summer's day,
and the castle is described as having an outer wall "clere and schine as cristal;"25. This shining
splendour stands as a stark contrast to the fairy courtyard full of sudden, violent death, and can
be seen to represent the failure of Orfeo’s reflection (the similarities between fairy and mortal) to

22

Jirsa, Curtis. "In the Shadow of the Ympe-tre: Arboreal Folklore in Sir Orfeo." English Studies. 89.2
(2008): 141-151. JSTOR. Web.
23

K. M. Briggs, “The Fairies and the Realms of the Dead”. Folklore, Vol. 81, No. 2 (Summer, 1970), pp.
81-96. JSTOR. Web.
24

“Sir Orfeo”, v. 352. (As bright as sun on a summer's day.)

25

“Sir Orfeo”, v. 358. (Clear and shining as crystal.)
13

completely cover the underlying truth of the savage unknown that is the Fairy King and his
realm.
A less dramatic but also significant moment between Orfeo and his fairy counterpart can
be seen in the climax of the poem. Orfeo, having played for the Fairy King and been granted a
boon, requests that he be given "That ich levedi, bright on ble,/That slepeth under the ympetree."26 The Fairy King is initially unwilling to give her up, saying:
'Nay!' quath the king, 'that nought nere!
A sori couple of you it were,
For thou art lene, rowe and blac,
And sche is lovesum, withouten lac;
A lothlich thing it were, forthi,
To sen hir in thi compayni.'27
The king's objection to surrendering the queen is a purely aesthetic one. He demonstrates no
emotional interest in Heurodys, but objects to relinquishing someone as beautiful as she to
someone as ugly as Orfeo has become during his decade in the wild. In contrast, Orfeo's
dialogue with Heurodys, as well as his self-imposed exile after her kidnapping, suggest a genuine
love and emotional attachment to his queen. This emphasizes the impression of the Fairy King
as a darker mirror of Orfeo; he desires Heurodys, just as Orfeo desires her, but only in a
superficial way. This difference marks the majority of the parallels between the two kings. Just
as the Fairy King wants Heurodys but does not love her, so he, his people and his land appear at
first to be like Orfeo and his, but the similarity is only skin-deep.

26

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 455-56. (That lady with the beautiful skin, that sleeps under the ympe-tree)

27

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 457-462 (No, quoth the king, that should not be! You would be a sorry couple, for you
are thin, ragged and dirty, and she is flawless and lovely; a loathely thing, therefore it wre, to send her
forth in your company.)
14

This is because, beneath the veneer of similarity to mortals and their world the fairies,
and in particular the country of Faerie itself, demonstrate a strong connection to nature and the
land, as well as something of an antipathy towards the civilised world and its trappings. Take,
for instance, the first contact between fairies and mortals in the poem. The Fairy King comes to
Heurodys in a dream while she sleeps. However, she is not asleep in her bed in the castle, nor
even anywhere in Traciens, her city; the Fairy King comes to her only once she has left the city
and fallen asleep beneath a tree. The Fairy King and his lands, in turn, are deeply natural in their
description. The Fairy King in Heurodys’ dream wears a crown of some unknown shining
crystal,28 as opposed to gold or silver which, like all metals, can be worked, cast, and molded
into new shapes through human skill. Similarly, when Orfeo ultimately arrives at the Fairy
King’s castle he finds that the entire outer wall is made, not of rough-hewn blocks of stone, but
of solid crystal.29 Small crystals can be cut into shape, but a solid castle wall of crystal could
only have grown into place naturally.
Just as the Fairy King and his country are deeply rooted in nature, so Orfeo is
incompatible with them as long as he continues to bear the trappings of civilisation. He
surrenders not only his kingdom but his shoes, his clothing, and the company of all other human
beings. 30 He strips himself of all vestiges of the civilised, human world, and even then he must
spend ten years in the forest before he can enter Faerie. The text takes great pains to show how
he has given up these things.
He that hadde y-werd the fowe and griis,
28

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 149-52

29

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 355-60

30

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 227-33
15

And on bed the purper biis,
Now on hard hethe he lith,
With leves and gresse he him writh.
He that hadde had castels and tours…
Now thei it comenci to snewe and frese,
This king mot make his bed in mese.
He that had y-had knightes of priis
Bifor him kneland, and levedis,
Now seth he nothing that him liketh,
Bot wilde wormes bi him striketh.31
The text goes on in this fashion, making it extremely clear that Orfeo has given up all these
things, exchanging them for their harsher, more spartan woodland counterparts. Once this is
accomplished and Orfeo has spent his decade in the wild, he must enter Faerie through a hole in
the rock, crawling three miles in the darkness. Only then has he truly rid himself of the air of
civilisation which is so anathema to the deep wild that is Faerie.
A similar though not identical wildness can be found in Tam Lin, a ballad from the
Scottish borderlands which presents many similar elements to those present in Sir Orfeo,
including striking parallels between the humans and fairies. Tam Lin is the story of Janet,
daughter of a Scottish nobleman, who rescues the titular character, a human knight, from
captivity in the fairy court under the rule of the Fairy Queen. The specific origins of the tale are
unknown, as it comes from an oral tradition as opposed to Orfeo's origins in the Auchinleck
Manuscript, a written collection of medieval narratives which can be more definitively dated.
The text is written in Scots, and the story takes place around Carterhaugh, an actual location in
the Scottish Borderlands. Unlike in Sir Orfeo, where the fairies are witnessed on a number of

31

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 241-252 (He that once wore fine furs and slept on purple linens, now on hard heath he
lies and covers himself with leaves and grass. He that had castles and towers… now that it begins to
snow and freeze, he must make his bed in moss. He that had ladies and knights of prowess kneel before
him, now he sees nothing that pleases him, but wild snakes by him glide.)
16

occasions, in Tam Lin they only appear in person at the climax of the story, and so our view of
them is comparatively brief. There are, however, ample comparisons to be made, most
specifically between Janet and the Fairy Queen.
The story begins with Janet dressing in green, a fairy color32 , and multiple descriptions of
her afterward mention this green clothing. She goes walking in Carterhaugh, well known to be
Tam Lin's domain and not a place for young women to travel in, lest he catch them. Janet does
indeed meet the fairy knight, and returns home with child to her father's castle. Stubborn and
determined, she leaves again for Carterhaugh and is confronted by Tam Lin who reveals that he
is not a true fairy but rather a human knight held captive in their court. He fears that the fairies
will soon sacrifice him to pay the 'tithe to hell', and gives Janet instructions on how to rescue
him. She lies in wait for the fairy procession on Halloween (All Hallow's Eve, the day when the
barriers between the fairy world, the mortal world, and the land of the dead are thinnest 33), then
pulls him from his horse and holds him tightly while the Fairy Queen puts him through a series
of transformations to throw Janet off. Janet, however, holds on, and gets Tam Lin for her own,
severing his ties to the fairy court. Again we see, as in Sir Orfeo, striking parallels between the
fairy villain and the mortal protagonist.
It is interesting to note that where in Sir Orfeo the antagonist was a Fairy King in
opposition to a mortal one, in Tam Lin a Fairy Queen has taken his place, reflecting a change
from a male to a female protagonist. This is in keeping with the idea of the fairy’s superficial

32

K. M. Briggs, “The English Fairies”. Folklore , Vol. 68, No. 1 (Mar., 1957), p. 276. JSTOR. Web. “It is
generally considered dangerous or unlucky to wear green, the fairies’ colour,”. Between the color of the
Green Knight in Sir Gawain & the Green Knight and the color of Janet’s clothing we can safely infer that
this was likely the case in the Middle Ages as well.
33

Briggs, “Fairies and the Realms of the Dead”, p. 92
17

attributes as a mirror of those of the mortal hero. Both Janet and the Fairy Queen are
noblewomen, both proud and unrelenting in their natures. Janet is unwilling to listen to anyone
else's advice. The opening of the ballad warns the reader, saying:
O I forbid you, maidens a,
That wear gowd on your hair,
To come or gae by Carterhaugh,
For young Tam Lin is there.34
But immediately after this opening, Janet is shown heading directly to Carterhaugh in defiance of
conventional wisdom. Upon her return from her meeting with Tam Lin, she ignores the concerns
of the old knight and of her father, who in contrast is described as "meek and mild"35. The Fairy
Queen appears more briefly, but her portrayal is stubborn and proud, first unwilling to relinquish
her knight and then full of bitterness and malice once she has been forced to.
Out then spak the Queen o Fairies,
And an angry woman was she:
'Shame betide her ill-far'd face,
And an ill death may she die,
For she's taen awa the boniest knight
In a' my companie.'36 .
Tam Lin himself is a relatively passive figure, serving primarily as the object of a battle of wills
between Janet and the Fairy Queen. He appears when Janet picks a rose in Carterhaugh, almost
as if summoned, and when she returns home she is pregnant (the action taken by Tam Lin which
results in this pregnancy is conveniently left out). He gives Janet instructions on how to free
him, but is unable to free himself. The text shows him taking almost no action at any point, in

34

Child, Francis J., ed. "The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Internet Sacred Text Archive. N.p., n.d. Web. 28
Apr. 2013. Variant A, v. 1
35

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, vv. 1, 11-14

36

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 41
18

support of either mortal or fairy. He is, in a sense, suspended between the two. This reflects
both his state of dual allegiance to his mortal heritage and the fairy court, but also the narrative
as a product of Janet’s attitude. Throughout the ballad Janet is fiercely independent, completely
disregarding the advice of her male elders. It makes sense, then, that her quest is concerned
primarily with a female adversary, and the only male main character (and one under fairy reign
for the majority of the ballad) is largely passive.
Already we see similarities between the Fairy Queen and Janet. Interestingly enough,
once Tam Lin has been liberated by Janet the Fairy Queen becomes wrathful and is described as
an "angry woman"37. This is a telling description considering that she is, in fact, not a woman, if
we use the OED primary definition of 'woman' as "an adult female human being". But for all
intents and purposes she acts as one in the story: her primary purpose as an antagonist is to
oppose Janet's right to a man, and once she loses she concedes that "Them who has gotten young
Tam Lin/Has gotten a stately groom."38; she is upset by the loss of Tam Lin, the "bonniest
knight" in her company, which would suggest that she had, after all, no intention to sacrifice him,
as she would have lost him in that case as well.
Again, as in Sir Orfeo, the 'dark mirror' dynamic is seen between Janet and the Fairy
Queen. One specific similarity, in fact, occurs in both texts. When Janet claims Tam Lin the
Fairy Queen is furious with her, saying that "she's taen away the boniest knight/In a' my
companie." 39 Bony, or bonny, is a Scots word meaning specifically beautiful or physically
attractive. The use of this word suggests that the Fairy Queen prizes Tam Lin as a member of her
37

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 41

38

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v.40

39

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 41
19

company specifically because he is so bonny, an attribute emphasized by Tam Lin himself earlier
in the text when he calls himself "fair and fu o flesh"40 . In both Sir Orfeo and Tam Lin the mortal
protagonist has an emotional or familial bond with the taken; Orfeo is married to Heurodys, and
Janet is pregnant with Tam Lin's child. In contrast, both the Fairy King and Queen in their
respective works are shown to prize the people they have taken because of their physical beauty,
valuing them as works of art of a sort.
In addition to the direct conflict between Janet and the Fairy Queen over Tam Lin there is
also the issue of Carterhaugh itself. The ballad opens by warning young maidens not to go to
Carterhaugh for fear of Tam Lin, then immediately segues into Janet going to Carterhaugh "as
fast as she can hie". Once there, she and Tam Lin have an argument. Tam Lin enquires why
Janet has come to Carterhaugh and picked his roses without his permission, to which she replies
that her father has given her Carterhaugh and she will ask no leave of him (Tam Lin) to go
there.41 When Tam Lin tells Janet later of the teind to hell, he says "pleasant is the fairy land,/
but, an eerie tale to tell,/Ay at the end of seven years/We pay a teind to hell;"42. He includes
himself as a denizen of the fairy land and a member of the court under the Fairy Queen.
Therefore we can think of him as a vassal of sorts, and his claim over Carterhaugh, by extension,
becomes a claim by the Queen, one which Janet challenges when she claims the land as her own.
The entire conflict between Janet and the Fairy Queen is one of ownership, in which both Tam
Lin and Carterhaugh are caught between competing mortal and fairy claims. Janet has been

40

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 24

41

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 7 "'Carterhaugh, it is my ain,/My daddie gave it me;/I'll
come and gang by Carterhaugh,/And ask nae leave at thee.'"
42

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 24. Italics are my own.
20

given Carterhaugh by her father, the local laird (a Scots term meaning landed noble), but the
fairies have claimed it as well. This is especially interesting if we consider where the fairies live;
both in Tam Lin and in Sir Orfeo Faerie is accessed by going underground. In Sir Orfeo, Orfeo
travels through a hole in the rock, and in Tam Lin the fairy land is described as being located
under a green hill. The fairies occupy the space underground, out of sight and out of mind in a
sense. With Tam Lin’s claim to Carterhaugh the fairy influence begins to creep into the domain
of the civilised world. Carterhaugh and Tam Lin himself are both the sites of a conflict between
civilisation, embodied by the mortal noblewoman Janet, and the wild unknown personified by
the Fairy Queen. These conflicts however, of right to a lover and rights to land, are distinctly
mortal ones which would ordinarily be resolvable by mortal means.
But the fairies are unmistakably magical, and as in Orfeo, the more inhuman and
otherworldly tones to the story are evident. Indeed, Tam Lin himself says as much of the place
that has been his home the past seven years, describing the fairy land as pleasant but eerie43. The
fairies and their country are beautiful, but lurking beneath the surface is the teind to hell, a
sacrifice which Tam Lin fears will be himself. His specific words are, "I am sae fair and fu o
flesh/I'm feard it be mysel."44 The choice of words is visceral, evoking images not of a quiet
disappearance into hell but a human sacrifice for which one "fu o flesh" would be uniquely
equipped. Specifically worth noting is the use of the word flesh, rather than something which
would have similar significance such as 'life'. A teind to hell could easily be assumed to be
something in the nature of a soul, but the use of 'flesh' implies that it is the meat on Tam Lin's
physical body which matters.
43

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 24

44

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 25
21

The Fairy Queen herself, though she may seem human for the aforementioned reasons, is
decidedly something Other. A piercingly disconcerting example comes at the very end of the
ballad, once Tam Lin has been won away from her. "But had I kend, Tam Lin,' she says,/'What
now this night I see,/I wad hae taen out thy twa grey een,/And put in twa een o tree.'" The
Queen, angry at her loss, says that if she had known she were going to lose Tam Lin she would
have plucked out his grey eyes and replaced them with wood, a mysterious remark which has no
clear meaning. Freud himself writes a whole section of Das Unheimliche on the uncanniness of
the removal of eyes.45
There is, of course, also the matter of Tam Lin's transformations by the Fairy Queen, an
act of powerful magic which sets her clearly apart from any mortal noblewoman. Tam Lin is
transformed into a variety of things depending on which variant of the ballad is being used, but
these things are always powerful and dangerous, things which humans would ordinarily avoid
such as wild bears and poisonous snakes. More telling though, perhaps, is Tam Lin's instruction
to Janet in variant B, that after he has reverted to his human form at last, she must dunk him first
in a stand of milk46 and then a stand of water. The water is more or less constant across the
variants, but the milk has a potent connotation of domesticity and safety. Milk is what mothers
feed to infants, and milk that is not from humans comes from tamed, domesticated animals
(another protection against fairies in this vein is bread, something else possessing associations
with home and hearth)47, the implication being that fairy magic is to be combatted with things

45

Freud, Sigmund. (1919h). Das Unheimliche. Imago, 5: 297-324; GW, 12: 229-268; The "uncanny," SE,
17: 217-256. See Chapter 3 and the discussion of the removal of eyes in Coraline.
46

The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant B, v. 34

47

Briggs, 276
22

which are familiar and homely. If we consider fairies to be unheimlich then they are, by the
literal meaning, “not of the home”; therefore it makes sense that things that are of the home
could be used to counter their influence.
This leads back to the idea of fairies as the embodiment of nature and the uncontrollable
wild in opposition to civilisation, a theme which recurs in Tam Lin. If we look at the incident of
the transformations above, all of the forms which Tam Lin takes, (fire, wild animals) have one
thing in common: they are not easily controlled or tamed. Faerie itself is said to be located under
a green hill, just as in Orfeo it is accessed via a hole in a large rock, perhaps a cave. It is also
important to note the time and meeting place at which Janet intercepts the Fairy Ride to rescue
Tam Lin. She is instructed to go to Miles Cross at midnight on Halloween. These all have in
common that they are in between one thing and another. A crossroads is the meeting of two
roads, midnight the meeting of two days, and Halloween traditionally was the end of one season
and the beginning of another, and a time when the line between the Otherworld and the mortal
one was especially thin 48. In this way Janet is better enabled to cross from her world to that of
the fairies, and then to take something back with her.
It is also important to note the subtle difference in the narrative between Tam Lin and Sir
Orfeo. If we continue on the premise that fairies serve to draw their human protagonists away
from the civilised world and into the wild, we must look at the manner in which the encounter is
initiated. In Orfeo, the Fairy King seeks out Heurodys, Orfeo’s beloved wife, and kidnaps her.
This forces Orfeo into a confrontation in which he must defend his world from the fairy element.
And while the encounter between Janet and Tam Lin is initiated by the latter, it is only done so

48

Briggs, “The Fairies and the Realms of the Dead”. p. 92
23

because Janet goes first to Carterhaugh. Janet clearly has little respect for her father and his
knights, telling her father “There’s neer a laird about your ha/Shall get the bairn’s name.” In the
persons of Tam Lin and the Fairy Queen she is given both a worthy lover and a formidable
adversary. If we think of the fairy element in Tam Lin as being, at least superficially, given form
and character through Janet herself, it casts the story in something of a new light. Unlike either
Orfeo or Sir Gawain (as we shall discuss soon), Janet, discontent with her lot, seeks out the
element of otherness which is alien to her life at home. Ultimately, however, it becomes a story
of defense against that other, just as Sir Orfeo does. Tam Lin is revealed to be a Christian man
by birth, making their baby a mortal one. Janet fights off the unknown in the form of the Fairy
Queen and reclaims Tam Lin for the civilised world.
Fairies and fairy influence in the Middle English masterpiece, Sir Gawain and the Green
Knight, are somewhat less overt than in Tam Lin and Orfeo. Where Orfeo had a Fairy King and
court, and Tam Lin has a Fairy Queen, the closest Gawain ever comes to actually saying the word
'fairy' is Morgan le Fay, where Fay comes from the French fee, meaning fairy (though the Green
Knight himself is referred to as perhaps being "half etayn"49 meaning giant, troll, or ogre,
supernatural creatures which had associations with fairies 50); and indeed, Morgan's appearance is
brief and seems an almost slapdash addition at the very end in an effort to explain the Green
Knight's motives51. Nevertheless, for students of fairy lore, and indeed those possessed of only
the more basic trivia, the fairy influence is clear for reasons which shall be explained shortly.

49

Armitage, Simon. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight: A New Verse Translation. 1st ed. New York: W.W.
Norton, 2007. Print. v. 140
50

Briggs, “The English Fairies”. pp. 272-3

51

"Morgan le Fay in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight", Albert B. Friedman, Speculum , Vol. 35, No. 2
(Apr., 1960), pp. 260-274
24

What is more, it contains many of the same elements of uncanny doubling, of opposition
between that which is fairy and that which is civilized, and of fairies drawing human heroes
away from their homes, as the previous two texts.
The story begins in Arthur's court at Christmas time. The Green Knight rides his horse
into the hall and challenges anyone who would take him up on it to a Christmas game, of sorts:
the challenged is given one stroke at the Green Knight, and then in a year and a day must seek
him out to receive a stroke in return. Gawain accepts, steps forward, and lops off the head of the
Green Knight, who promptly picks it up off the ground by the hair, mounts his horse and rides
off. Already the fairy influence is clear, if unstated: the Knight himself is not only clad in solid
green, but possessed of long, green hair, a green beard, and even green skin52. The color will
recur again before the poem ends, much as Janet’s green clothing in Tam Lin signifies her
inevitable involvement with the fairies. The story then skips forward to the next autumn, when
Gawain sets off to find the Green Knight at his home, the Green Chapel, wherever it may be. He
searches long for it with no luck, until at last he comes upon a beautiful castle where he might
spend the holidays, for Christmas time is approaching again. The lord of the castle is most
hospitable, and to Gawain's relief says that the Green Chapel is but two miles away, and that he
will give Gawain a guide to lead him there on New Year's Day so that he may fulfill his
agreement with the Green Knight. In the meantime, Gawain stays in the castle and he and the
lord of the house, Sir Bertilak, have a game of sorts: each day, the lord will go out hunting and
Gawain will stay in the house; at the end of the day the host will give Gawain whatever he has
won on his hunt, and Gawain must give in return whatever he wins at home. As soon as the lord

52

Briggs, p. 276
25

of the house leaves, his beautiful wife approaches Gawain in his bed-chamber and attempts to
seduce him, but to no avail. Ultimately he accepts from her only a green girdle said to protect its
wearer from harm, but in doing so breaks his agreement with his host, refusing to surrender his
gains in hope that the girdle will save his life. After three days, Gawain leaves to meet the Green
Knight and face his doom. However, rather than executing him, the Knight only gives him a
small cut on the neck, revealing that the Green Knight is, in fact, Sir Bertilak. Had Gawain
accepted the advances of his host's wife and dishonoured himself, he would have been killed;
however, because he only took the girdle, and that out of fear for his own life, he has been
spared.
Here we have something of a reversal of the pattern in the previous examples of Orfeo
and Tam Lin. In those stories the fairies appear at first as fairly human. They look more or less
like humans, as the fairies in Orfeo do, and they have similar pastimes and social structures.
They are measured by human standards and they have strong parallels with their respective
human protagonists. Even though they may mark themselves as fairies in word early on, only
later is it demonstrated to be true by something like a castle with crystal walls, or a
transformation magic at a crossroads at midnight. Gawain, on the other hand, begins with the
entrance of the Green Knight, someone who could never be mistaken for human, being both
inhumanly large of frame and bright emerald green from head to toe, entering the scene and
committing a distinctly inhuman act, being decapitated and riding away unharmed. However,
once the quest begins in earnest and Gawain arrives at Sir Bertilak's house, we see nothing that is
clearly inhuman in nature until the very end when we realize that Bertilak and the Green Knight

26

are one and the same, and that the fairy has been lurking right in front of our eyes in human form
the whole time and we did not recognize him.
We see many of the same themes present in the Green Knight's appearances as in the
fairy presence in Orfeo and Tam Lin. When Gawain finally confronts his adversary at the Green
Chapel, he finds it to be not a church in the contemporary, Christian sense, but a green hill with a
small entrance and a chamber inside, much like a how or barrow, the traditional abode of
fairies.53 A parallel may also be drawn to Tam Lin's assertion that the fairies live under "yon
green hill", or to the fairy land of Orfeo which is accessed via a hole in a rock54. Much like the
fairies in the previous texts, the Green Knight has a clear link to the natural landscape; his holy
place is not a man-made church but a green mound. In some ways it even resembles a church;
the text describes it as having "a hole on the ende and on ayther side,"55 evoking the front door
and transept of a cruciform church.
In addition, the story begins with the Green Knight, as our fairy element, issuing a
challenge to the mortal court, much like the Fairy King at the outset of Sir Orfeo. Rather than
simply stealing the queen away as she sleeps, the Fairy King comes to her in a dream and tells
her that at that time tomorrow he will take her, and that there is nothing she or her husband can
do to stop it. It is not merely an instance of fairy kidnapping, a common enough thing in
folktales; it is a challenge made by the wild to the civilised world of chivalry. Just so, in Gawain
the Green Knight's first appearance is with just such a challenge, made more clearly and overtly

53

Evans-Wentz, W.Y. The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1911.
Print.
54

“The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v. 23

55

Armitage, v. 2180
27

than in either text which precedes it. The Green Knight, upon entering Camelot, addresses King
Arthur, saying:
Bot for the los of the, lede, is lyft up so hyghe,
And thy burgh and thy burnes best ar holden,
Stifest under stel-gere on stedes to ryde,
The wyghtest and the worthyest of the worldes kynde,
Preve to play wyth in other pure laykes,
And here is kydde cortaysye, as I haf herd carp,
And that has wayned me hider, iwyis, at this tyme.56

The knight, as the agent of the fairy wilds, states that he is drawn to Camelot specifically because
it is a bastion of order and civilisation. Arthur’s knights are the best both at combat and at riding,
his court is championed as a paragon of chivalry and of courtesy, a concept more integrally
related to society than anything else listed. It is because Arthur’s court is such an exemplar of
these virtues that the Green Knight is drawn there to lay down his challenge.
Another essential attribute, also seen in Orfeo, is that of the journey away from the manmade world (in this case the court of Camelot) and into Faerie: a journey through the unknown.
Indeed, Gawain’s journey is not merely through the unknown but to the unknown. He leaves
Camelot with no map, having never heard of the Green Chapel and with no idea where it might
conceivably be. He spends months of hardship wandering through forests, almost completely
alone, forced to forage for food and sleep out in the cold. This reinforces the idea that the
medieval hero is surrounded on all sides by the unknown wild, a wilderness into which Gawain
has been drawn by the fairy element. Only after months of wandering through the natural

56

Armitage, vv. 258-264, (“But because your acclaim is so loudly chorused, and your castle and
brotherhood are called the best, the strongest men to ever mount the saddle, the worthiest knights ever
known to the world, both in competition and true combat, and since courtesy, so it’s said, is championed
here, I’m intrigued, and attracted to your door at this time.”)
28

landscape is he permitted to enter what passes for Faerie: Bertilak’s house and, ultimately, the
Green Chapel.
In addition to these themes, Gawain shows repeated instances of mirroring in a similar
manner to that displayed in the previous texts. The most obvious of these is that inherent to the
beheading game, (which begins with Gawain taking an axe to the Green Knight's neck and ends
with that knight doing the same to him) but more subtle instances pervade throughout the text.
The story begins with the Green Knight arriving at Arthur's court, acting as a sort of emissary
(though it is not revealed at the time) of Morgan le Fay, and, in a more conceptual sense, as an
emissary of the wilderness against which the chivalry of Arthur's round table is a bastion. In
response Gawain is sent forth as an emissary of Arthur and of order and comes, unwittingly, to
the very castle of the Green Knight and his mistress, and from there deliberately to the Green
Chapel. In addition the story begins with the Green Knight coming to Camelot on a holy day
and starts its conclusion with Gawain arriving at the Green Knight's (Bertilak) castle on the same
holy day the next year.
The mirroring becomes even clearer once it is revealed that Bertilak and the Green
Knight are one and the same; with this knowledge comparisons between Gawain and Bertilak
become as significant as those between Gawain and the Green Knight. Gawain's entire stay at
Bertilak's castle can be seen in a sense as a contest between the two. Gawain is renowned for his
steadfast attention to duty, his purity, his honor and his propriety, a reputation which precedes
him. When first he reveals himself as Gawain to Sir Bertilak's household the other dinner guests
flock to him and and whisper to each other excitedly, saying:
Now schal we semlych se sleghtes of thewes
And the teccheles termes of talkyng noble.
29

Wich spede is in speche, unspurd may we lerne,
Syn we haf fonged that fyne fader of nurture….
In menyng of maneres mere
This burne now schal uus bryng.
I hope that may hym here
Schal lerne of luf-talkyng.57
Gawain's reputation is immediately established within Bertilak's household. With this in mind
all interactions between Gawain and Bertilak can be viewed potentially as a contest in nobility of
character. Much as Orfeo wins his wife from the Fairy Queen by a display of musicianship, the
fairy antagonist here challenges Gawain on fields in which he is both knowledgeable and adept.
Thanks to the duality of the fairy antagonist both aspects of Gawain’s character can be
confronted with worthy adversaries. The Green Knight, a hulk of a man armed to the teeth and
engaged with Gawain in a potentially lethal trial, challenges his martial prowess. Sir Bertilak, on
the other hand, is set in opposition to Gawain’s famed courtesy and courtliness. These are
opponents that Gawain, as a knight, can understand. However, when in the end Gawain goes to
meet the Green Knight again the illusion of similarity is shattered by the nature of the Green
Chapel, which Gawain describes as being the sort of place where the Devil might make his
Mass.58
This contest of courtliness between Gawain and Bertilak is best illustrated by the
agreement into which the two men enter, and indeed by the way the carrying out of said
agreement is structured within the text. Each day for three days Bertilak rides out to go hunting
in the morning, and Gawain is paid a visit by his host's wife, and each time the text is structured
57

Armitage, vv. 916-919, 924-927. ("Watch now, we'll witness his graceful ways, hear the faultless
phrasing of flawless speech; if we listen we will learn the merits of language since we have in our hall a
man of high honor. … We few shall learn a lesson here in tact and manners true, and hopefully we'll hear
love's tender language too.”)
58

Armitage, vv. 1985-8
30

the same. It begins with Bertilak's hunt, described in great detail and in pursuit of a different
quarry each time, and then follows up with Gawain's attempts to deflect the lady's advances
while still remaining courteous. At the end of the day each exchanges what he gained, and it is
revealed in the end of the story that Bertilak was well aware of all Gawain's interactions with his
wife. The arrangement is a gentleman's agreement, relying on each to honorably provide the
other with his gains for the day. This is the second time in the story, unbeknownst to Gawain,
that the two men play a game of honor with each other.
One notable difference in Gawain's mirroring as compared to that of Orfeo and Tam Lin
is the degree of difference in the characters of the protagonist and antagonist. While the fairies
and mortals in the previous texts may share specific interests, pursue the same lovers or desire
the same lands, the behaviour of the fairies is never much short of villainous, as well as being
almost entirely inscrutable. In Gawain, Gawain and Sir Bertilak compete with each other but
only in fun; indeed, their similarities outweigh their differences. At the end of the story no harm
is done to anyone and Gawain and the Green Knight part ways as friends. The bitter antagonism
that exists between Orfeo and the Fairy king and between Janet and the Fairy Queen, is simply
not present in Gawain. When the Green Knight arrives at Camelot he specifically states that he
means them no harm, saying,
"Ye may be seker bi this braunch that I bere here
That I passe as in pes, and no plyght seche." 59
At no point in the story does the Green Knight display any malice towards Gawain, and
ultimately it is revealed that he never desired to do Gawain harm, that the game they played was

59

Armitage, vv. 265-266. ("Be assured by this hollin stem here in my hand that I mean no menace. So
expect no malice,")
31

merely a test of the knight's honor. This good-natured trickery is a far cry from the depictions of
fairies in Orfeo and Tam Lin.
For all this seeming good nature, however, the Green Knight plays the same role as
fairies in the first two texts. He draws the protagonist away from the civilised world and into a
conflict of one kind or another in which the protagonist is forced to defend his world against the
fairy’s incursion. Each fairy figure serves, at its heart, this same purpose. They draw the mortal
protagonists away from civilisation and the man-made world and into Faerie, the land of the wild
and the untamed. The main character leaves his court and castle and goes off into the unknown
wilderness to seek adventure and glory. More than this, however, he goes to fight things that are
not within the confines of the court, things that are not under the control of man. Each of these
texts begins with an incursion by this uncontrollable force, provoking, sometimes forcing, the
mortal protagonist to leave his world and go out into the uncharted wild and defend against it.
In each text the human protagonists struggle against the challenge of their fairy counterparts,
fighting, in a metaphorical sense, to beat back the darkness. Orfeo and Janet seek to take
something away from the fairies and make it their own again (though Tam Lin has been a fairy
knight for some time at the start of the ballad, he was once a Christian man), and Gawain pits the
chivalry and civilization of Arthur's court against the wildness of the Green Knight, exemplified
by his Green Chapel. The fairies, however, come out of these encounters relatively unscathed.
The hero is not seeking to conquer the wilderness, to expand the civilised world into the
uncivilised; rather, he seeks only to defend what was his to begin with. It is for this reason that
we see such strong similarities between the fairy elements and the mortal ones, especially in
physical form. These fairies can be, at least at first, plausibly mistaken for human beings,

32

especially for other noblemen, women, or knights; they are enemies that can be beaten in the
same way that one would defend against a mortal enemy. Each work is, at its heart, a story of
humanity fighting against things that it does not understand, to protect what it holds dear. It is
always easier to fight what you know, and so they give the fairies the face and form, the hobbies
and pastimes, that they know best: their own.

33

Chapter 2

The previous chapter examined human-sized fairies, specifically those found in the
medieval texts Tam Lin, Sir Orfeo, and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. These fairies were
beautiful, powerful, and dangerous; though they seemed at first glance much like their mortal
counterparts, deeper investigation showed them to be subtly alien and different. They embodied
an unknown, unmapped wilderness which could not be understood but only staved off. They
also bore little resemblance to the popular conception of fairies just a few short centuries later:
tiny creatures, mischievous at worst and benevolent at best. So what changed? Where did these
new fairies, seemingly almost wholly unlike the old, come from? No doubt many factors
contributed, a changing world and a newly discovered continent not least among them. Roger
Lancelyn Green in his essay “Shakespeare and the Fairies” attributes much of the change to the
the Bard, and specifically to his comedic fairy masterpiece, A Midsummer Night’s Dream60. But
this sudden shift was not merely a function of idle Shakespearean fancy. If we continue to think
of fairy characters as catalysts of motion away from civilisation and society, we must consider
the deeper reason behind their diminution. In order to understand this it may help us to look
briefly at the actions taken by the fairies in the medieval texts that precipitate the movements
made by their mortal counterparts. The basic, overarching structure of the medieval narratives is
one in which the hero is drawn out to do battle (in one sense or another) with the fairy element in
order to defend some element of his world; he takes back what is his, foiling if not defeating the
fairy, and returns home. Sir Orfeo begins with the fairy king kidnapping the title character’s
beloved wife; in Tam Lin, Janet is impregnated by the titular character; and Sir Gawain and the
60

Green, Roger Lancelyn. "Shakespeare and the Fairies." Folklore. 73.2 (1962): 89-103. Print
34

Green Knight opens with a dramatic challenge to the honor of Arthur’s court, culminating in a
supernatural beheading. As mentioned in chapter one, the medieval texts invoke a sense of being
surrounded by the wilderness, as we can see in Gawain’s and Orfeo’s extensive wanderings
before they finally encounter Faerie. The medieval protagonist is beset on all sides by an
antagonistic natural world which seeks to do harm to the place of order he has carved for himself
out of the chaos. The fairy is given shape like to that of the hero because that form is the one
which he best understands and is thus better equipped to defend against.
What changed then, to precipitate the change in fairies? In his essay ‘On Fairy Stories’,
Tolkien writes of little fairies that they “seem to become fashionable soon after the great voyages
had begun to make the world seem too narrow to hold both men and elves; when the magic land
of Hy Breasail in the West had become the mere Brazils,”61. This gets to the heart of the matter.
In the time between the writing of Gawain and the writing of Midsummer, the Americas were
discovered. The age of exploration was in full swing and the unknown wilds were becoming less
an ever-present threat to be defended against and more a fascinating potential for exploration; the
age of castles, of fortified dwellings in which entire towns could and would hole up and hide
from danger, was passing. As a result of all these changes, by the time Shakespeare was writing
the lure fairies presented was of a somewhat different nature. As the natural world became
something to be understood rather than defended against, fairies took on a different aspect. They
became smaller, less threatening, less powerful, because the concept they embodied, that of the
unknown wild, was no longer unconquerable. The questing knight defending his court had been
supplanted by the explorer looking for something that could be understood, a world the limits of

61

Tolkien, p. 111
35

which could be found, defined, and classified. As such, fairies were in many ways diminished,
first in the time of Shakespeare, and then continuing in the same tradition for more than three
hundred years. Beginning around the time Midsummer was written the changes began, and
though fairies would continue to change over the next three centuries much of what they were
during that time would continue in this new tradition, finally reaching perhaps the best-known
fairy of our time, Tinkerbell of J.M. Barrie’s play (and later book) Peter Pan. But it is important
in this study to begin at the beginning, as far as any single beginning can be found (a daunting if
not impossible task when it comes to fairies), and to that end we must first examine A
Midsummer Night’s Dream, looking closely to see what differences arise between the large and
small fairies, and what, if anything, remains the same.
Shakespeare is believed to have written A Midsummer Night’s Dream between 1590 and
1596. It primarily follows the story of three sets of characters, set against the backdrop of the
wedding day of Duke Theseus and his bride Hippolyta: the lovers, (Demetrius, Lysander,
Hermia, and Helena) the fairies, (Oberon and Titania, the king and queen, as well as Puck,
Oberon’s servant) and the players (a group of Athenian laborers preparing a play for the
upcoming nuptials).
Shakespeare’s fairies are different from the large fairies of medieval literature in a
number of key ways. First and most obviously, they are miniature (though they are played by
human actors, the text makes their tiny size abundantly clear). The fairies in the medieval texts
of the last chapter are human-sized at least, if not larger; the Green Knight, for instance, is so
large he is considered to be perhaps half giant.62 Though it can be assumed from Titania’s brief

62

Armitage, v. 140
36

love affair with the human Bottom that the fairies are able to change size, their natural stature
when among themselves seems to be quite small. When the fairies first appear, in the first scene
of act two, Puck has a brief talk with a servitor of Titania who says of her queen, “The cowslips
tall her pensioners be;/In their gold coats spots you see;/Those be rubies, fairy favours,/In their
freckles live their savours:/I must go seek some dew-drops here,/And hang a pearl in every
cowslip’s ear.”63 This is the first of many implications that the fairies are of miniscule size.
Cowslips are a yellow flower found most commonly in England (conspicuous, considering that
Shakespeare sets his play in Greece); they grow to a maximum height of ten inches, and yet are
described as tall by the fairy, giving us some idea of the speaker’s size. In the next scene as
Titania prepares to sleep she orders her servants, “Then, for the third part of a minute, hence;/
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds,/Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,/
To make my small elves coats,”64 . The fairies are small enough that bat-wings serve them as
coats. These are but a few of the indications, present in nearly every scene in which the fairies
play, demonstrating their small size. This provides an interesting contrast in more ways than one
when compared to the large fairies of such texts as Sir Orfeo. There is, of course, the obvious
change in size, but in their descriptions it seems that, where Orfeo’s fairies were almost more
than human, Shakespeare’s have become something less. When the Fairy King first appears in
Heurodys’ dream in Orfeo, he is ruler of a great and beautiful kingdom full of fertile lands and
lord of an impressive host; his knights are described as the fairest Heurodys has ever seen 65; he

63

Shakespeare, William. A Midsummer Night's Dream. 8th ed. New Haven: Yale UP, 1960. Print. The
Yale Shakespeare. II.i. vv. 10-15
64

Shakespeare, II.ii. vv. 2-5

65

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 147-8. “Y no seighe never yete bifore, so fair creatours y-core.” “Of all the folk that mine
eyes have seen, they were the fairest folk, I ween.”
37

wears a crown not of gold or silver but wrought of some mysterious gemstone that shines like the
noonday sun; his castle wall, similarly, is made of solid crystal, with buttresses of red gold.66
Compare this to the descriptors applied to Shakespeare’s fairies. They have names like
Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, and Mustardseed, all names related to small plants and animals
(when Bottom is introduced to these fairies he makes light of them by their names, saying of
Cobweb “I shall desire of you more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb: if I cut my finger, I
shall make bold with you”67 , meaning that he will use the cobweb as a bandage). In many ways
they bear more similarities to insects, as Titania’s lullaby to ward off the snake and hedgehog
(potential threats to small beings) suggests.
Nevertheless, though they have become less than humans in stature and wealth, they
demonstrate a somewhat more human characterization, specifically in the portrayal of their
emotions. The tall, human-sized fairies of last chapter have certain superficial human traits and
similarities with the mortal protagonists of their stories. They look like humans, albeit more
beautiful, and enjoy spending their time in many of the same pursuits such as hunting, riding,
and dancing. However, with the possible exception of the Green Knight, this is the extent of
their development as characters. We are told nothing of their motives or their emotions, in
contrast to what we see of the mortal protagonists. Orfeo, for instance, loves his queen and,
wishing to be by her side always, goes to rescue her. The Fairy King’s motives for kidnapping
her in the first place, on the other hand, are never given; he only states that she must go with him,
whether she wishes to or not 68. The closest a human-sized fairy ever comes to expressing an
66

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 140-64, 350-63

67

Shakespeare, III.ii. vv. 190-91

68

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 165-174
38

emotion is in Tam Lin, when Janet steals Tam Lin and the Fairy Queen flies into a rage. No
indication is given, however, that the Fairy Queen views Tam Lin as anything more than a
possession that has been stolen from her. She demonstrates no emotional attachment to him.
The Green Knight, admittedly, looks less human than these others, but only in his coloration; his
shape is nearly identical to that of a formidable human knight. Even more human in appearance
is his unenchanted state as a seemingly human lord of a manor, with a wife and servants, and
while his wife is often described as beautiful, Bertilak never mentions any love he might fell for
her. Gawain is unable to tell that Bertilak and the Green Knight are one and the same until the
truth is revealed to him at the conclusion. This is because the essential nature of the wilderness
that the medieval fairies embody is not for us to know.
Titania, Oberon, and Puck, on the other hand, as major characters in the play, exhibit
substantially different behavior from that of the medieval fairies in the aforementioned texts.
This difference is made clear almost from their introduction and is inherent in the fundamental
dynamic of the characters’ relationship within the play; to wit, they (Oberon and Titania) are
engaged in a lover’s spat. In their first interaction of the play, the fairy king and queen cannot
even greet each other civilly. “Obe. Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania./Tita. What! jealous
Oberon. Fairies, skip hence: I have forsworn his bed and company.”69 Titania refuses not only
to sleep with Oberon but even to spend any time with him. Oberon and Titania bicker
incessantly with each other. This, in itself, is one of the most obvious differences from the
medieval texts: the fairy king and queen occupy the same space such that they can bicker. Tam
Lin has a fairy queen, Orfeo a fairy king, but neither has both at once. This reflects the change in

69

Shakespeare, II.i. vv. 60-62
39

protagonists; where Janet was opposite the Fairy Queen, and Orfeo opposite the Fairy King, now
we have two sets of feuding lovers as our protagonists, necessitating both a king and a queen of
Faerie. This state of being engaged in a lover’s spat is also a marked difference from the
medieval fairies, largely because our insight into the minds of the fairies is far greater than it ever
was before. We are never given the reason behind the exploits of Fairy King and Queen of Orfeo
and Tam Lin.
Another distinctly human trait, which is to say an emotion (many things in folklore can
take on the appearance of humans, but very few behave as they do) displayed by Oberon is that
of pity. While waiting in the woods for Puck to return with the Love-in-Idleness flower, Oberon
overhears Demetrius abusing Helena and takes pity on her. When Puck returns, Oberon issues a
command. “A sweet Athenian lady is in love/With a disdainful youth: anoint his eyes;/But do it
when the next thing he espies/May be the lady.”70 Oberon, an immortal fairy, is possessed by an
almost paternal concern for Helena, a human girl. More importantly, we are clearly informed of
the motive behind Oberon’s intervention.
One can, however, argue a different motive for the fairy king’s intervention in the love
life of the Athenian youths. When Demetrius and Helena have finished their fight and left the
stage, Oberon says to himself, “Fare thee well, nymph: ere he do leave this grove,/Thou shalt fly
him, and he shall seek thy love.”71 This phrasing suggests a motive not so much of pity but of
mischievous amusement. Oberon’s stated desire is not merely to make Demetrius love Helena
whom he scorns, but to reverse the tide and make his love so overwhelming that even the one
who loves him now will be unable to accept it. This paints Oberon less as a concerned parent
70

Shakespeare, II.i. vv. 260-263

71

Shakespeare, II.i. vv. 244-246
40

and more as a sort of prankster, a view reinforced by the instructions he gives to Puck. “Effect it
(the enchantment) with some care, that he may prove/More fond on her than she upon her
love.”72 If this change is effected as Oberon describes it the situation becomes neither better nor
worse, but merely humorously reversed for the benefit of the observers, the fairies.
The second noticeable change in Shakespeare’s fairy characters is in their power, and
specifically in the way that power relates to the role they fill in the play. In the medieval texts of
the previous chapter, the role played by the fairies was unquestionably that of the antagonist.
Even in Gawain and the Green Knight, a text in which the primary antagonist is ultimately
revealed to mean Gawain no harm, the Green Knight still presents an imposing and potentially
lethal figure. The fairies of Midsummer have been diminished, placing them in entirely different
roles, ranging from benignly paternal figures at best (as when they bless the houses of the
newlyweds at the conclusion of the play), to pranksters and tricksters at worst. This is perhaps
best exemplified by one of the play’s most enduring characters, Puck, in his introduction.
Titania’s servant recognizes Puck, saying, “Are you not he/That frights the maidens of the
villagery;/Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,/And bootless make the breathless
housewife churn;/And sometime make the drink to bear no barm;/Mislead night wanderers,
laughing at their harm?”73 Puck’s activities seem to be primarily composed of harmless tricks,
specifically those concerned with domestic, household activities (churning butter, milking cows,
grinding meal, and brewing beer).
The nature of these pranks resonates with one of the few attributes Shakespeare’s small
fairies share in common with their man-sized, medieval counterparts: a close relationship and
72

Shakespeare, II.i. vv. 265-266

73

Shakepseare, II.i. vv. 34-39
41

connection with the natural world (especially with plants and things which grow in the ground,
acting as care-takers of sorts) and antagonism towards man-made things. The cowslips are
named as the fairy queen’s ‘pensioners’, a word in this context meaning dependents, depending
on the fairies, at the very least, to bestow upon them their ‘rubies‘ (red dots sometimes found
inside cowslip flowers). Before Titania falls asleep she tasks some of her people to ‘kill (the)
cankers in the musk-rose buds’; musk-rose is a wild flower and cankers are a kind of plant rot.
The primary duties the servant fairies display, aside from taking care of their king and queen, are
to protect and beautify the forest. On a larger scale, Titania and Oberon’s bickering seems to
have upset the natural world. “But with thy brawls thou hast disturb’d our sport./Therefore the
winds, piping to us in vain,/As in revenge, have suck’d up from the sea/Contagious fogs; which,
falling in the land,/Hath every pelting river made so proud/That they have overborn their
continents”74 . In a further, implicit addition to this connection, the fairies are only active within
the forest, almost for the complete duration of the play. The mortal characters are only affected
once they leave the city of Athens and enter the wood, and once all has been resolved and set
right they immediately leave the wood and return to Athens. Only at the very end do Titania and
Oberon enter the house of the newlyweds to bless it, and then only once all the mortal characters
have finished their parts in the play and will not return.
Nevertheless the fairy connection to nature, in particular to the unknown wild, and the
corresponding antipathy towards civilisation, lack the potency of the medieval texts.
Shakespeare has done away with the necessary journey through the unknown which the hero
must undertake before he can enter Faerie. As discussed in chapter one, each medieval text

74

Shakespeare, II.i. vv. 87-92
42

involves a journey through the unknown (Orfeo through the rock, Janet at the midnight
crossroads, Gawain through the wilderness) before they can encounter the fairies they seek. The
protagonists of Midsummer, on the other hand, leave Athens and go straight to the fairy wood
without incident, implying foreknowledge of its exact location. The arduous journey which must
be undertaken before the medieval protagonist can access Faerie gives a sense of space between
it and the known world and places it apart. By contrast, the ease with which the forest is
accessed by the mortals, as well as Oberon and Titania’s casual references to far-off but known
lands such as India, reinforces the feeling that Shakespeare’s fairies do not have a land of their
own.
Returning to the fairy mischief mentioned before; if we view Puck and the other fairies as
emissaries and guardians of the natural world, their pranks can be seen to make a certain sort of
sense. Puck, as an agent of nature, purposely disrupts the activites of civilisation (in which, as
shown above, the fairies have no part), especially those which involve subduing the natural
world to make it useful; a quern, for instance, is a device used for grinding grain into meal,
altering something of nature — a plant — into the foundation for something wholly domestic,
i.e. bread. This is in keeping both with the old role of fairies, acting as emissaries of the natural
world challenging the civilised one, but also with the diminished state of Shakespeare’s fairies as
pranksters. In Gawain and the Green Knight, the Green Knight acts in the role of emissary from
the natural world as well; his chapel, after all, is a naturally formed cave. However, he also rides
his horse into the middle of Arthur’s court, so large he is described as being half giant 75, and
equipped with an enormous axe, striking a very threatening figure. His role as potential

75

Armitage, v. 140
43

executioner hangs in the air all through the text. Puck, on the other hand, is content to skim the
fat from milk.
This difference is made perhaps most abundantly clear through a comparison of their
respective magics, specifically Puck’s transformation of Bottom as compared to the fairy queen’s
transformations of Tam Lin. Puck transforms Bottom’s head into the head of an ass, both for his
own amusement and so that Titania, waking, will fall in love with the transformed man. The
choice of transformation here is important; Bottom is changed into a common beast, one which
lends itself traditionally to being the butt of the joke. The fact that he is an ass only serves to
heighten Titania’s humiliation, further diminishing her stature. This stands in stark contrast to
the transformation magic of Tam Lin’s Fairy Queen. In response to Janet seizing the fairy knight
and pulling him from his horse, the fairy queen grows angry and changes him into a series of
threatening and dangerous shapes, first a poisonous snake, then a bear, then a red hot iron and
finally a burning coal. Each of these things, were they real and not mere illusions, could end
Janet’s life; Puck’s pranks, though mischievous, pose no real threat.
Even further from these roots are Oberon and Titania, whose attitude towards mortals is
almost that of concerned parents; indeed, in the case of Titania it could be said to be exactly that.
The source of contention between the fairy king and queen is a boy, referred to as a changeling
child, who Titania has taken and whom Oberon wishes to have as part of his train. However, the
boy is not a changeling in the traditional sense of the word. Ordinarily, the word changeling is
used when a fairy kidnaps a human child and replaces him with an inferior, magical copy;
changeling often refers to the copy, but can be used to refer to the child76 . This is not the case

76

Briggs, 274
44

with Titania and her ‘changeling’. While arguing with Oberon she states that the boy is the son
of a ‘votaress’ of hers, and paints a picture of a close friendship between herself and the boy’s
mother. She then goes on to explain how she came by the boy. “But she (the mother) being
mortal, of that boy did die;/And for her sake I do rear up her boy,/And for her sake I will not part
with him.”77 She feels a loyalty to the boy’s deceased mother, and for the mother’s sake is
dedicated to raising the boy as her own. In both Sir Orfeo and Tam Lin a human (though not a
child) is taken by the Fairy King or Queen. However no indication is given of a prior
relationship between the fairies and either the mortal taken or said mortal’s friends or relations.
The fairy kidnapping is perceived rather as an assault on the protagonist and the civilised world;
Titania, on the other hand, seems to have nothing but good will for her votaress and the woman’s
son.
One more tie that Shakespeare has severed in creating his court of small fairies is that
longstanding one between fairies and the dead, a connection ably demonstrated in Sir Orfeo and,
less obviously, in Tam Lin. Orfeo, for all its knights and fairies, is an altered re-telling of the
classical Greek myth of Orpheus and Eurydice; the main difference (aside from the addition of a
happy ending) is that where in Orfeo the queen is kidnapped and taken to Fairyland, in the
original myth Eurydice dies and Orpheus pursues her to the Underworld, the land of the dead. In
Tam Lin, the event which immediately precipitates the titular character’s transport to Fairyland is
a bad fall from a horse78, an event which could easily be interpreted as resulting in Tam Lin’s
death. An implicit connection is made, then, between Fairyland and the realm of the dead,
reinforced in countless folktales and described at length in folklorist K.M. Briggs’ essay, “The
77

Shakespeare, II.i. vv. 135-137

78

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant A, v.23
45

Fairies and the Realms of the Dead”. In A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Shakespeare directly
addresses this possible relation and refutes it. When Oberon explains his plans to Puck, Puck
responds, saying:

“Puck. My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger;
At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there,
Troop home to churchyards: damned spirits all.
That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone;
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They wilfully themselves exile from light,
And must for aye consort with black-brow’d night.
Obe. But we are spirits of another sort.
I with the morning’s love have oft made sport;”79

Shakespeare acknowledges that fairies might mistakenly be lumped in with this group of spirits,
and so subject to the rules which apply to them, but clearly states that this is not the case.
Fairies are, by nature, different and separate from humans. However, the way in which this
difference manifests itself changes between the medieval and post-medieval fairies. Rather than
taking on the general form and semblance of human beings while maintaining a subtly uncanny
difference in character, post-Shakespearean fairies have transferred that sense of difference onto
their physical forms. They no longer appear human, having more in common with insects in
some ways, but instead act just like us, engaging in pity, empathy, lover’s quarrels, etc. This
transfer of difference allows for a different sort of fairy characters; their motivations are clear,
79

Shakespeare, III.ii. vv. 378-389
46

their actions more easily explained, and their lives more intimately tied up with those of
mankind.
This is because the relationship between fairies, the embodiment of the unknown
wilderness that exists outside the civilised world, and the mortal protagonists who are of that
world, has changed. As has been discussed before, in the medieval texts the role of the fairies is
to personify the wild in such a way that its incursions can be defended against. The fairy element
makes forays into the mortal world which are then retaliated against, but neither side gains
ground. By the time of A Midsummer Night’s Dream this is no longer the case. The fairies
appear to have ceased their raids; instead, they come to bless the marital bed of the newly wed
nobility. On top of this we can also view Lysander and Hermia’s escape into the forest as an
attempt to expand civilisation into the fairy domain. If we think of marriage as an element of
civilisation, then the lovers’ attempt to make their nuptials in the forest can be seen to represent
an expansion of civilised mores into the wild, beginning the process of subduing it. Though their
flight is away from Athenian law, their desire is not to live free of all law but rather to create
their own.
The fairy archetype which Shakespeare does so much to establish here (small, twee
things that wear bats’ wings for coats and stand knee-high to a flower) comes to dominate the
next several centuries, to the point that in 1765 Samuel Johnson wrote of “the fairy kind”, that
they are “an order of Beings to which tradition has always ascribed a sort of diminutive agency,
powerful but ludicrous,”80 . However, this is not to say that the older, more folkloric fairy
traditions have been completely eliminated; rather they they continue to exist just below the

80

Lancelyn Green, p. 97
47

surface, bubbling up in new works periodically, if infrequently. One such work is William
Allingham’s poem, The Fairies, published in 1850. The poem begins with the lines, “Up the airy
mountain/Down the rushy glen,/We daren’t go a-hunting,/For fear of little men;”81 and goes on to
describe a figure who might be the fairy king, as well as the kidnapping and death of a girl
named Bridget. The fairies in Allingham’s poem are undoubtedly of the small, somewhat twee
variety, as can be seen in the first stanza of the poem:
Wee folk, good folk,
Trooping all together;
Green jacket, red cap,
And white owl’s feather.
Down along the rocky shore
Some make their home,
They live on crispy pancakes
Of yellow tide-foam;
Some in the reeds
Of the black mountain-lake,
With frogs for their watch-dogs,
All night awake.
This description is very much in the tradition that spawned such works as Drayton’s Nymphidia
and Herrick’s Hesperides, in which the fairies use toadstools for tables and dine on newt’s legs. 82
However, it is important to note that the poem opens with a warning, the necessity of which
becomes apparent later on when we are told the story of ‘little Bridget’.
They stole little Bridget
For seven years long;
When she came down again
Her friends were all gone.
They took her lightly back
Between the night and morrow;
They thought she was fast asleep,
81

Allingham, William (2012-05-17). Sixteen Poems. Kindle Edition. p. 11

82

Lancelyn Green, pp. 96-97
48

But she was dead with sorrow.
They have kept her ever since
Deep within the lake. 83
The charming little men who dine on pancake foam suddenly become much more dangerous.
The fairies in Allingham’s poem owe more to folklore than to the medieval traditions of the fairy
court, it is true, but nevertheless they lack the wholly wholesome nature of many of the postmedieval fairies. For one thing, they appear to be directly responsible for the death of a small
girl. Allingham’s fairies cast a pall of fear on the landscape, such that people refuse to enter their
domain for fear of them. Allingham has also revived the connection between fairies and the
dead; the fairies in his poem do not just kill little Bridget, they keep her body deep within the
lake. On the whole the beings of The Fairies seem to possess an essential nature more in
keeping with the medieval fairies, only masked by a thin veneer of post-medieval, Shakespeareesque attributes.
These changes do not, however, seem to be the norm, as evidenced by the wild popularity
of our next text, J.M. Barrie’s Peter Pan, and its decidedly more post-medieval fairy elements.
Peter and Wendy, as the novel was originally called, was based on Barrie’s stage play, Peter Pan,
or The Boy Who Wouldn’t Grow Up, and brought into the public imagination two of the most
enduring fairy characters ever written, Tinker Bell and Peter Pan himself. Though Allingham’s
fairies are more of a throwback to older traditions than would be commonly seen for some time,
nevertheless fairies were beginning to grow claws once more, and these can be seen to some
extent in Peter Pan, without by any means abandoning the post-medieval elements. In the
characters of Peter Pan and Tinker Bell both sides of the fairy tradition, the perilous and the

83

Allingham, p. 11
49

prankster, are represented. In order to fully understand this we must examine in detail both
characters, beginning with the one Barrie himself identifies as a fairy, Tinker Bell.
If we look at the changes Shakespeare wrought in his fairies in the most basic way, we
see that while they look less like humans (being substantially smaller and comparable in many
ways to insects), they behave more like them. In Tinker Bell, often refered to as Tink84, this
process reaches its natural conclusion. Barrie describes her at first as a light flashing about the
Darlings’ night-time nursery, but then as “a fairy, no longer than your hand… It was a girl called
Tinker Bell, exquisitely gowned in a skeleton leaf, cut low and square, through which her figure
could be seen to the best advantage.”85 Tink, like Shakespeare’s fairies, is small, no bigger than
a child’s hand. Note the description used to identify her size, however, compared to that in A
Midsummer Night’s Dream. Shakespeare’s fairies are implicitly compared in size to flowers,
acorn cups, bat wings, etc. This accentuates an unspoken connection to the natural world; for
Tinkerbell the standard of comparison is neither plant nor animal but a human child’s hand.
Indeed, the origin of Barrie’s fairies is explicitly a human one: “‘You see, Wendy, when the first
baby laughed for the first time, its laugh broke into a thousand pieces, and they all went skipping
about, and that was the beginning of fairies.’”86 Tinkerbell and her ilk owe their very lives not to
the land, to the forests and the lakes, but to humanity. They are brought into existence by the
laugh of a human baby. What is more, those same human beings appear to have control over
whether the fairies live or die. “‘You see, children know such a lot now, they soon don’t believe

84

Barrie, J. M. Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens ; Peter and Wendy. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008. Print. p.
93 onwards
85

Barrie, p. 89

86

Barrie, p. 93
50

in fairies, and every time a child says, “I don’t believe in fairies,” there is a fairy somewhere that
falls down dead.’”87 So we see that human children have direct and complete control of both the
birth and death of fairies. We must also take note of Tinker Bell’s name, as Barrie does, for it too
is not without significance; the author practically spells it out for us. Shortly after Tink’s
introduction, Peter explains to Wendy that “‘she is called Tinker Bell because she mends the pots
and kettles.’”88 This is entirely contrary to almost everything we have seen of fairies before. Far
from being anathema to civilisation, Tinker Bell actually aids in its continuance by repairing the
elements by which raw things are converted into food. Where previous fairies were
demonstrated to have an aversion to or hatred for domestic items and processes, like Puck does
when he skims the fat off the milk, Tinker Bell is intimately connected to them.
One of the fundamental defining characteristics of fairies in all of the texts previously
examined in this work has been their inherent connection to nature and to the land, whether
mortal land or that of some Otherworld. Tam Lin’s fairies clash with Janet over the possession of
Carterhaugh, as well as being described as living under the green hill; likewise, the Green Knight
makes his church under a hill in a green valley by a stream; not to mention the strong antipathy
which Orfeo’s Fairy King and his country bear towards the world of mankind. Even
Shakespeare’s fairies, reduced as they are from their former stature, have an undeniable link to
the forest in which they dwell, caring for it and guarding it. Tinker Bell has abandoned this
connection in all but the most superficial sense, her only concession her clothes, a dress
constructed from a ‘skeleton leaf’. Tinker Bell is a creature of air and imagination, light and

87

Barrie, p. 93

88

Barrie, p. 94
51

sound with no substance. Her speech is described as “the loveliest tinkle as of golden bells”89
and she is frequently seen rapidly flitting from place to place, appearing only as a ball of brilliant
light (indeed, in the original stage production Tinker Bell was represented not by an actress but
by a spotlight, and voiced by a set of bells90). Perhaps most telling is Tinker Bell’s (and all the
fairies’) role in allowing the children to fly. Barrie explains to the audience as the Darling
children attempt to fly that, “Peter had been trifling with them, for no one can fly unless the fairy
dust has been blown on him. Fortunately, as we have mentioned, one of his hands was messy
with it, and he blew some on each of them…”91 Tinker Bell, and presumably all other fairies,
involuntarily shed ‘fairy dust’ around them, and it is this fairy dust which enables the Darling
children to fly, actively severing their connection with the earth both in the immediate, literal
sense of solid ground, and also a broader sense in that their newfound ability to fly takes them
away from home and across water to Neverland.
Of course an integral part of the fairy element in these texts is not just the fairies but the
land, Faerie itself. In the case of Peter Pan this function is served by Neverland, the very nature
of which says a great deal about the state of fairies in Peter Pan. For one thing, Neverland, like
Tinkerbell, is formed in no uncertain terms wholly from the collective human imagination. As
the Darling children approach in the air they catch sight of the physical incarnations of their
make-believe games. “‘I say, John, I see your flamingo with the broken leg.’ ‘Look, Michael,
there’s your cave.’ … ‘It’s a wolf with her whelps. Wendy, I do believe that’s your little

89

Barrie, p. 89

90

Roger Lancelyn Green, Fifty Years of Peter Pan, Peter Davies Publishing, 1954. Apologies for the
incompleteness of the citation, I was unable to find either a copy of the book in any medium or the ISBN
number.
91

Barrie, p. 100
52

whelp.’”92 More important than this, however, is Neverland’s state of awayness (to coin a term).
After being slowly relegated to smaller and smaller parts of the land, from being potentially
almost anywhere in England in Gawain, to one forest in Midsummer, Faerie has finally retreated
from the world entirely and become a place apart with no apparent ties to the earthly world. The
unknown has become progressively more and more knowable until, finally, it has been
completely subdued by civilisation, forcing it out and away from the world of men, its cities and
maps. Faerie has been forced to surrender its connection to the natural world, because the
natural world is no longer an unknown. Even the journey to Faerie has lost its mystery, since the
Darling children have Peter to guide them there.
Another measure of fairies has always been their relationship with, and similarities in
form or character to, mortals. The medieval fairies in last chapter’s texts challenge the mortal
protagonists, fight with them, steal from them, and share many of their superficial characteristics,
but the audience is given very little insight into their minds. This is because their purpose is not
to be understood but to be combatted in a direct, confrontational fashion; the human characters’
motivations, by contrast, are very clear. By Shakespeare’s time the fairies have lost much of this
inscrutability and are openly shown bickering with each other and displaying emotions such as
affection and pity, reflecting the relationships of their human protagonists. The audience is given
a great deal more insight into their minds than ever before; their otherness, rather than being an
aspect of their demeanor, has been transferred to their physical form. Tinker Bell again takes this
transferral a step further. When Wendy first meets Tink she is enchanted with her (in the
figurative, non-magical sense); Peter conveys her feelings to Tink, saying that Wendy wishes

92

Barrie, p. 105
53

Tink were her fairy. Peter translates Tink’s response for Wendy, saying “‘She is not very polite.
She says you are a great ugly girl, and that she is my fairy.’”93 Tinker Bell demonstrates a clear
love for and strong emotional attachment to Peter, and what is more there is an implication that
the reader actually understands her better than Peter himself. When Wendy and Peter kiss, Tink
immediately responds by pulling Wendy’s hair and tells Peter that every time they kiss she will
do the same. “‘Why, Tink?‘ Again Tink replied, ‘You silly ass.’ Peter could not understand why,
but Wendy understood;”94 . The reader is expected to infer that Tink is in love with Peter, as
Wendy does, but Peter does not understand. This is an entirely different viewpoint from that we
are given of the medieval fairies, whose actions we see but whose mind we rarely glimpse.
Tinker Bell’s mind, on the other hand, is clearer to the reader than to Peter himself. In many
ways Barrie’s most famous fairy, Tinker Bell, can be seen as the logical extension of the changes
wrought in Shakespeare’s fairies. She presents primarily as a ball of light, only seeming at all
human when she stays still long enough to be inspected closely; however, greater pains are taken
to develop her character and make her motivations clear and understandable than with any
previous fairy. This is because in the absence of a strong connection to something larger than
herself, to the unknown or to nature, Tinker Bell has little to nothing other than her physical form
to set her apart from the human characters. The element of alien otherness which defined so
much of fairies before has been stripped away.
Peter Pan himself, however, is something rather different from Tinkerbell. While it
cannot be said that he is, in the most technical sense, anything other than human (being born as a
human baby), if we consider the fact that ‘mortal’, meaning fated to die, is also a frequent
93

Barrie, p. 94

94

Barrie, p. 96
54

synonym for ‘human’, and that Peter Pan is not, in fact, mortal at all, we begin to see the
complexity of the issue. He is, as old Solomon Caw calls him in Peter Pan in Kensington
Gardens, a “Betwixt-and-Between”95. He certainly cannot be called ‘mortal’, as we see in the
final chapter of Peter and Wendy that he stays the same age as generations of Wendy’s
descendants grow old and die, strongly implying that Peter is immortal (though not impossible to
kill, as his embrace of his own imminent death at the Lagoon in chapter eight shows). Of all
possible labels he is perhaps closer to being a changeling than to anything else; but unlike the old
changelings, children stolen in their infancy and taken to fairyland, Peter Pan goes of his own
volition. In character, however, Peter presents something of a cross between the whimsical,
emotional, trickster fairies of the post-medieval era, and the more sinister man-sized fairies of the
medieval texts.
To begin with, he acts, like fairies in the old tradition, as a thief of children. The way in
which Barrie describes Peter when he first meets the Darling children in their nursery at night is
very telling to this effect and paints a surprisingly sinister picture of the eternal youth. He speaks
to Wendy “in a voice that no woman has ever yet been able to resist,”96 and he is described as
“cunning Peter,” “frightfully cunning,” and “the sly one”97. The children, meanwhile, are
portrayed as utterly unable to resist his charms, lured by him away from their nursery.

95

Barrie, p. 17

96

Barrie, p. 91

97

Barrie, pp.95-97
55

Not only does he lure these children from their home, but he takes them across the sea
(one of the traditional ways to access Faerie98) to a magical land with which he has a deep,
intrinsic connection. The fifth chapter of Peter and Wendy opens with a statement to this effect:
“Feeling that Peter was on his way back, the Neverland had again woken into life.”99 Peter’s
connection to the land is explicitly stated; it is aware of him and his presence has a direct effect
on it. Indeed, his connection with Neverland is in many ways far deeper than that he possesses
with any living being.
While it is true that Peter is certainly not devoid of feeling, his emotions and in particular
his interpersonal connections are fleeting and of little personal significance to him. In the final
chapter of Peter and Wendy, Peter returns to see Wendy as he had promised. She tries to
reminisce with him about their adventures of the previous year, but with no success. “‘Who is
Captain Hook?’ he asked with interest when she spoke of the arch enemy. ‘Don’t you
rememeber,‘ she asked, amazed, ‘how you killed him and saved all our lives?’ ‘I forget them
after I kill them‘ he replied carelessly. When she expressed a doubtful hope that Tinker Bell
would be glad to see her, he said, ‘Who is Tinker Bell?’”100 . Peter is, at his heart, first and
foremost a being of Neverland, forming no lasting interpersonal connections and possessed, in
some ways like Sir Orfeo’s Fairy King who kidnaps Heurodys to display her in his court, only of
fleeting desires and whims. Both Neverland and Peter seem to have a sort of resistance to

98

O'Conor, Norreys Jephson. "The Early Irish Fairies and Fairyland." Sewanee Review. 28.4 (1920): 556.
Print. Also see Thomas Rymer in which Thomas’s journey to Fairie is all in darkness but constantly
accompanied by the sound of the sea.
99

Barrie, p. 112

100

Barrie, p. 219
56

alterations in the status quo; each changes from time to time but ultimately returns to the way it
was. They are both eternal, unchanging.
At the same time he possesses the same complex, almost love-hate relationship with
domesticity that so many folkloric fairies seem to have (for instance, milk is said to be both a
preferred food of the fairies and proof against them).101 Peter becomes indignant when Wendy,
seeing him crying in her nursery, suggests that his lack of a mother could be the source of his
grief.102 Similarly, he forbids his Lost Boys from discussing mothers at all in his presence.
However, he develops a strong attachment (inasmuch as he is able) to Wendy, to the point of
playing house with her and pretending the Lost Boys are their children; Wendy, who of all the
characters in the book most represents domesticity and civilisation. This is perhaps best
demonstrated by her gift to him at their first meeting when he, not knowing what a kiss is,
expects a physical object. Wendy, momentarily at a loss, responds by giving him a thimble, an
object used in sewing, an activity with powerful domestic ties. 103
Knowing all this about Peter casts his theft of the Darling children in a new light,
strongly reminiscent of the medieval fairies. He acts as an agent of the uncivilised natural world,
infiltrating the civilised one with intent to take something away, to lay down a challenge, and,
especially in the post-industrial revolution age, to suggest that perhaps mankind’s mastery of
wild nature is not as complete as it might seem. However, from this point forward the
relationship between Peter, the fairy, and Wendy, the human, procedes entirely according to postmedieval logic. Far from being required to defend her world against the fairy influence, Wendy
101

Briggs, pp. 276, 281

102

Barrie, p. 90.

103

Barrie, p. 92
57

travels to Faerie (Neverland) and acts as a missionary of sorts, attempting to teach civilisation to
Peter and the Lost Boys. “About this time Peter invented, with Wendy’s help, a new game that
fascinated him enormously… It consisted in pretending not to have adventures, in doing the sort
of thing John and Michael had been doing all their lives: sitting on stools flinging balls in the air,
pushing each other, going out for walks and coming back… He boasted that he had gone a walk
for the good of his health.”104 Wendy’s civilising influence creeps into Peter’s fairy wildness,
eventually leaving perhaps the only permanent mark anyone has ever left on him; for decades
after the end of the novel, Barrie tells us, Wendy’s descendants would periodically go away with
Peter to Neverland for a week to do his spring cleaning. 105
I wrote above that Peter is a sort of changeling, but unlike the traditional changeling
figure he leaves to live with the fairies on his own, a significant and telling difference. Peter is a
changeling for a new era. The old tradition of changelings comes from a place of fear, fear of the
wild that lurks outside the home; the same sort of attitude that underlay the tall, powerful,
dangerous fairies of last chapter’s medieval texts. Peter Pan is born of an entirely different
mindset: one of curiosity, of fascination with fairies and with the world to which they belong. It
was exactly this attitude and this era that produced the unique circumstances that led to the
Cottingley Fairy Photographs.
In 1917 (five years after the publication of Peter and Wendy) two cousins, Elsie Wright
(then sixteen) and Frances Griffiths (ten years old) staged photographs of fairies using cardboard
cut-outs posed amongst the plants in their garden in Cottingley. The girls claimed to have
encountered fairies in their garden and to have taken photographs of them, a claim which they
104

Barrie, p. 137

105

Barrie, p. 226
58

maintained until the 1980s. The pictures came to the attention of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, a firm
believer in the supernatural, and from there became widespread. There was much skepticism,
but there was also a not insubstantial amount of belief and credulity given to the girls and their
fairies.106
Much time could be (and has been) spent discussing the cultural impact of the Cottingely
photographs. Suffice to say, the circumstances of the Cottlingey photographs themselves are a
perfect example of the era which spawned Peter Pan. The attitudes towards fairies had changed
so much that now, rather than acting as a source of fear, fairies themselves had become the lure.
Elsie and Frances went off on their own in search of fairies, with no prompting, and in the true,
scientific tradition that had marked the 19th century they set out not just to find fairies but to
definitively photograph and record them. It seems somewhat unlikely that their intent was to
hoodwink the nation, but the fact that they did was made possible by England’s deep-seated,
post-industrial longing for fairies. In the three hundred and twenty-five years since the creation
of A Midsummer Night’s Dream, fairies had become both widely disbelieved, and widely desired
for that disbelief. Only once the world had lost its fairies did people begin to realize how much
they missed them.

106

Sanderson, S.F. "The Cottingley Fairy Photographs: A Re-Appraisal of the Evidence." Folklore. 84.2
(1973): 89-103. Print.
59

Chapter 3

So far we have discussed fairies from the Middle Ages, fairies from the time of
Shakespeare, and gone as late as fairies from the beginning of the 20th century. However, if we
wish to bring our examination of fairies into the modern day, we cannot possibly ignore the
genre of fantasy, nor the works that fall within its borders. A discussion of the fantasy genre, its
parameters, its definitions, and its origins, could (and does) fill books; it is not my intention to
write on the genre as a whole, nor to speculate on its nature. Suffice to say that, in the three
centuries between Shakespeare and Barrie, while there was certainly no shortage of fairy
literature, neither was it concentrated and cumulative in such a way as it would become with the
advent of the fantasy genre. Though a young genre, fantasy has inevitably grown and changed a
great deal in its short lifespan. One thing, however, which one sees often throughout fantasy
(though not, of course, in all fantasy) is the appropriation, and I do not intend the word in a
negative sense, of folklore and myth; stories and characters, figures and tropes, which far predate
the genre itself. Often this appropriation is done with little regard for tradition; a mythical figure
is easily plucked from his myth and transplanted into a new story, stripped of any ties the author
does not find useful, and instead mixed with other, similar figures and given new attributes and
characteristics, blending many traditions into one. It is therefore natural that one should find in a
number of fantasy works the presence, explicit or otherwise, of fairies. This, by itself, is no
surprise; fairies have been a persistent presence, in one form or another, in English literature for
the past six or seven hundred years if not longer (the manuscript containing Sir Orfeo, at least,
has been dated to ca. 1330). However, especially in recent modern fantasy, the fairies which
figure are not those of the post-medieval tradition which dominated so much of the past several
60

centuries. These fairies harken back to older traditions, some more mythical — as in the Irish
Sidhe— and some more literary or folkloric; in either case, these fairies have more in common
with Tam Lin’s Fairy Queen and Sir Gawain’s Green Knight than they do with Barrie’s
Tinkerbell or Shakespeare’s Peaseblossom. In order to more deeply explore this new breed of
fairies we will examine two works of modern fantasy, seemingly very different from each other:
Neil Gaiman’s chidlren’s novella Coraline, published in 2002, and Susanna Clarke’s historical
fantasy tome, Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell, published in 2004. These new old fairies are
designed to bring something back to the world which had been lost along with the advent of the
post-medieval fairies: the powerful unknown. In many ways these modern fairies are very much
in the same tradition as the medieval ones; the major differences, the changes in which one can
see the intervening years and the way the world has changed, lie in their relationship with the
human protagonist. In the medieval texts, as we have discussed before, the fairies served as a
representation of the unknown made more manageable, one which could be effectively defended
against. In the post-medieval texts, that unknown became something to be explored, understood
and civilised. These modern texts occupy a space somewhere in the middle of these two
extremes; protagonists who have spent their lives in a highly man-made, civilised world, find
themselves longing for an element of the wild unknown. They act on this longing and seek out
the fairies (in one form or another), desiring not to subdue and civilise them but rather to bring
that fay wildness back into their world with them. Ultimately, though, they find it to be more
powerful, and more importantly far more dangerous, than they had anticipated; the fairies come
out as a dark, atavistic version of the protagonist, one which the civilised hero is ill-equipped to
handle. However, before examining these texts we would do best to look back a bit to fantasy in

61

a more nascent form, and the works of one of its founding fathers, so to speak: J.R.R. Tolkien,
writer of the seminal novels The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. Though the mythology, both
new and old, in Tolkien’s world of Middle-Earth is extensive, however, it is perhaps not the best
source for fairies. For that we would do better to look to his non-fiction work, the essay entitled
“On Fairy Stories”.
Much of this work deals with fairy stories in a broad sense which often refers to fantastic
fiction as a whole, but especially in the beginning of the essay he writes at some length both of
his opinion on the current state of fairies and how he believes they ought to be represented in
fiction. He speaks of his early and abiding distaste for diminutive fairies, saying “Drayton’s
Nymphidia is one ancestor of that long line of flower-fairies and fluttering sprites with antennae
that I so disliked as a child, and which my children in their turn detested… The business began,
as I have said, long before the nineteenth century, and long ago achieved tiresomeness.”107 From
here Tolkien becomes more concerned with the nature of fairy-stories, but we can glean
something of his opinion on what a true fairy ought to be from his oft-repeated name for the land
of Faerie itself: the Perilous Realm. Tolkien conceives of Faerie as a place of danger, and he
describes true fairy-stories as being concerned primarily with “the aventures of men in the
Perilous Realm or upon its shadowy marches.”108 Real fairy-stories then, according to Tolkien,
are tales of mortals adventuring in Faerie. This casts in an interesting light a brief remark in the
narration of Tolkien’s novel, The Hobbit. Tolkien writes of Bilbo Baggins, the protagonist,
whose mother was a Took:

107

Tolkien, p. 111

108

Tolkien, p. 113
62

It was often said (in other families) that long ago one of the Took ancestors must have
taken a fairy wife. That was, of course, absurd, but certainly there was still something
not entirely hobbitlike about them, and once in a while members of the Took-clan would
go and have adventures.109
This, then, reflects Tolkien’s conception of Faerie and its inhabitants as being the place (and the
stuff) of adventures, and this is certainly a trend we see not only in Coraline and Jonathan
Strange, which could be considered to owe something of themselves, perhaps, to Tolkien, but
also in the medieval texts. Tolkien goes on in his description of fairy-stories above to say, “If
elves are true, and really exist independently of our tales about them, then this also is certainly
true: elves are not primarily concerned with us, nor we with them. Our fates are sundered, and
our paths seldom meet. Even upon the borders of Faerie we encounter them only at some chance
crossing of the ways.”110 It is clear, then, why Tolkien so detests fairies and fairy-worlds such as
are seen in Peter Pan, for instance; for these things owe almost all of their substance, like
Neverland, to the imagination of humanity. One gets the impression that everything about their
lives is intimately bound up with those of mortals. Tolkien says of fairies, “It is man who is, in
contrast to fairies, supernatural (and often of diminutive stature); whereas they are natural, far
more natural than he.”111 Fairies in the bulk of the post-medieval tradition cannot be said to truly
meet this definition, as they are not tied to nature, unknown and unknowable, but to the fleeting
fancy of man. The fairies and fairy land of Peter Pan, after all, are born entirely of the laughter
and imagination of human children. How much exactly of fantasy is owed to Tolkien is a matter
for debate and varies from author to author, as it must. Nevertheless it cannot be denied that the

109

Tolkien, J.R.R. The Hobbit. 4th. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1996. Print. p. 11

110

Tolkien, “On Fairy Stories”. p. 113

111

Tolkien, p. 110
63

fairy figures, whether or not they are explicitly named as such, in Coraline and Jonathan Strange
seem to have a great deal more in common with Tolkien’s notion of what a fairy ought to be than
they do with Shakespeare’s, let alone Barrie’s. This becomes clear through a closer examination,
which we shall begin first with Neil Gaiman’s novella Coraline.
Coraline tells the story of the titular character, Coraline Jones, a young girl who moves to
a new flat in an old house during her summer vacation before school. Bored without playmates
and brushed off by her busy parents, Coraline discovers a mysterious door in her drawing room
which leads her to a secret world occupied by a slightly different version of her house, where she
meets her other mother and other father, who appear similar to her normal parents but with shiny
black buttons for eyes. The other parents are completely devoted to her, giving her everything
she could ask for her and loving her constantly and overtly. All, however, is not as it seems, and
the other mother turns out to be a far more sinister figure than Coraline could have ever
suspected.
Again, as in Gawain and the Green Knight, the fairy figure in Coraline is not specifically
named as a fairy. She is the other mother, also referred to by the ghost children Coraline meets
as the “beldam”112 , an archaic term for an old woman or a witch. In examining the other mother
of Coraline, it is important to remember the recurring traits and habits of the medieval fairies of
chapter one (especially those which they subsequently lost in chapter two), one of the most
significant of which was an uncanny doubling, a strong similarity on the part of the fairy and the
fairy-world to the protagonist and his mortal world, but with subtle differences. This we see in
spades in Coraline, starting with Coraline’s entry into the other world.

112

Gaiman, Neil. Coraline. 2nd ed. New York: HarperTrophy, 2003. Print. p. 79
64

Coraline walked down the corridor uneasily. There was something very familiar about it.
The carpet beneath her feet was the same carpet they had in her flat. The wallpaper was
the same wallpaper they had. The picture hanging in the hall was the same that they had
hanging in their hallway at home. She knew where she was: she was in her own home.
She hadn’t left. She shook her head, confused. She stared at the picture hanging on the
wall: no, it wasn’t exactly the same. The picture they had in their own hallway showed a
boy in old-fashioned clothes staring at some bubbles. But now the expression on his face
was different — He was looking at the bubbles as if he was planning to do something
very nasty indeed to them.113
Freud writes that, “The ‘uncanny is that class of the terrifying which leads back to something
long known to us, once familiar.” Or, put another way, the uncanny is the familiar made
unfamiliar. The fairy figures of chapter one frequently demonstrated this uncanniness, appearing
in many respects just like human beings, often just like the specific protagonist; however, upon
closer inspection they prove to be slightly skewed or off. Coraline’s entrance into the other house
strongly evokes this specific definition of uncanniness. At first, Coraline believes she has not
left her home; everything is so familiar, mimicking her house almost perfectly. Almost. By
subtly changing the content of the painting, Gaiman has rendered the familiar (Coraline’s house)
unfamiliar, making it clear that this place which seems known is, in fact, unknown. By changing
the boy’s intent to one of malice rather than making a neutral change, Gaiman signals that this
new place which lurks under the facade of Coraline’s house is a dangerous one in which she
could potentially come to harm. The other mother’s introductory description only serves to
heighten the uncanniness:
“A woman stood in the kitchen with her back to Coraline. She looked a little like
Coraline’s mother. Only… Only her skin was white as paper. Only she was taller and
thinner. Only her fingers were too long, and they never stopped moving, and her dark red

113

Gaiman, p. 25
65

fingernails were curved and sharp. ‘Coraline?’ the woman said. ‘Is that you?’ And then
she turned around. Her eyes were big black buttons.”114
The other mother is similar to Coraline’s real mother, familiar enough that she does not appear as
a stranger to Coraline, but at the same time is not identical; Coraline can clearly tell, even before
she sees the button eyes, that the other mother is not her mother. In spite of this, though, she eats
the other mother’s food and enjoys the activities provided for her. The other mother invites her
to take part in this forever, and asks in exchange only that Coraline allow the other mother to sew
buttons into her eyes. This brings back the aspect of Freud’s “Das Unheimliche” dealing with
the removal of eyes, which we discussed in chapter one. 115 Freud, however, says that Jentsch’s
(the author of an earlier paper on the uncanny to which Freud refers) point of intellectual
uncertainty relating to the feeling of uncanniness has nothing to do with the effect which the
removal of eyes produces.116 I am inclined to disagree, especially within the context of Coraline.
In the world of Coraline’s other mother, nothing is as it appears. The eyes, as our main means of
perception, are also the method by which we perceive the truth. This perception of truth is what
allows us to be intellectually certain, dispelling, to a degree, the sensation of uncanniness. By
removing the eyes and replacing them with buttons, the lie which is the other mother and her
world becomes the truth because Coraline, robbed of her eyes, is unable to perceive otherwise.
As Coraline becomes more and more unwilling to accept the other mother, she becomes less and
less a double of Coraline’s true mother, her world a more and more shoddy copy of Coraline’s
true world.

114

Gaiman, pp. 25-26

115

See chapter one, page 21

116

Freud, p. 7
66

As in the medieval texts, the doubling is not just limited to the fairy; the world itself is a
copy of Coraline’s, only through a glass, darkly. Perhaps one of the best examples is that of Mr.
Bobo, the man who lives upstairs from Coraline, and his mice. In the real world, Mr. Bobo is
training mice to perform to music in a circus. Though Coraline never sees the mice in person,
they seem to have some knowledge of her (knowledge which Mr. Bobo does not appear to
possess) as well as a benevolent interest in her. Before she is even aware that the door to the
other house opens onto anything more than a brick wall, Mr. Bobo delivers a message to her
from the mice. “‘The message is this. Don’t go through the door.’ He paused. ‘Does that mean
anything to you?’”117. Like everything else from Coraline’s world, Mr. Bobo has a double in the
other house; however, instead of trained mice, he keeps large, black, rats with glowing red eyes.
Rats, like mice, are rodents that are generally perceived as pests (however both can also be kept
as pets). They infest people’s dwellings and eat their food. Rats, however, are larger, more
powerful, and thus more threatening. They are associated with uncleanliness, disease, and urban
rot and decay. They are, in many senses, a darker and more sinister version of mice, in keeping
with the theme of the other house as a darker and more sinister copy of Coraline’s home. The
large, black rats of the other house would carry negative associations when contrasted with Mr.
Bobo’s mice even without their supernaturally glowing red eyes.
The uncanny doubling exhibited by Coraline’s other mother is not the only trait she
shares in common with more medieval fairies: she is also a thief of mortals, primarily children,
but also loved ones, and her intent in taking them is clearly malicious. When Coraline first
comes to the other house, the other mother fulfills her every wish, trying her hardest to get

117

Gaiman, p. 14
67

Coraline to stay with her. However, for whatever reason, she is unable to keep Coraline there by
force, so in order to coerce her, the other mother kidnaps Coraline’s parents. Coraline goes for
some time without her parents, preparing her own food and looking after herself, and so we
know when she does venture back into the other world to rescue them that it is out of love. In
much the same way that the Fairy King’s theft of Heurodys in Sir Orfeo draws Orfeo away from
his court and into the unknown wilds to pursue her (this is his function in the story, whether or
not it was his intent), the other mother has stolen Coraline’s parents in order to bring the
protagonist back into her (the other mother’s) world. At one point, the other mother tells
Coraline that she loves her. “And despite herself, Coraline nodded. It was true: the other mother
loved her. But she loved Coraline as a miser loves money, or a dragon loves its gold. In the
other mother’s button eyes, Coraline knew that she was a possession, nothing more.”118 The
other mother wishes to possess Coraline for much the same reason as the Fairy King in Orfeo
steals Heurodys, as a pleasant and entertaining trinket or bauble. Like the medieval fairies she
manifests her otherness not (at least not at first) in a physical difference from humans, but in a
difference of character. The other mother, for all she desires Coraline, does not love her as her
true, human mother does.
When Coraline continues to refuse the other mother’s advances, she is imprisoned behind
the mirror in a twisted sort of time-out. Here she encounters the trapped souls of three other
children from the past who were lured away from home by the other mother, whom they call the
beldam (this brings to mind the cat’s thoughts on the other mother’s motivations from earlier in
the book: “‘She wants something to love, I think,’ said the cat. ‘Something that isn’t her. She

118

Gaiman, p.104
68

might want something to eat as well.’”119 ) The children, whose memories of themselves are
slowly being eroded by time, explain to her what the other mother did to them. “‘She left us
here,’ said one of the voices. ‘She stole our hearts, and she stole our souls, and she took our lives
away, and she left us here, and she forgot about us in the dark.’”120 The state of these children,
stolen and stripped of their flesh, brings to mind the fate of Tam Lin (had Janet not stepped in to
save him): taken in his youth by the Fairy Queen to live in Faerie under the earth, without Janet’s
help Tam Lin would have been offered up as the tithe to hell, an offering which the text suggests
would involve the removal of his flesh.121 Tam Lin is enticed by Fairie, much as the ghostly
children were enticed by the promises of the beldam; however, he now fears for his life,
specifically because he is so ‘fu o flesh’. These children, with no one to rescue them, have been
stripped of their flesh and rendered incorporeal, unable to escape.
This brings us to another traditional role of fairies which was largely abandoned in the
post-medieval era: keepers of the dead. As was discussed in previous chapters, there is ample
evidence to interpret Tam Lin’s fall from his horse and subsequent travel to the fairy land as
death, and in Orfeo, between the mythic parallels (in the original Greek, Eurydice dies and goes
to the underworld, but in Orfeo she is stolen and taken to Fairie) and the dead men in the Fairy
King’s courtyard, among other things, the notes of death are even more overt. There is ample
folkloric evidence as well for a strong relationship between fairies and ghosts. 122 The fairies in
the medieval texts, however, come off as slightly more benign than the other mother due to a

119

Gaiman, p. 63

120

Gaiman, p. 82

121

See Chapter 1, p. 21

122

Briggs, K.M. "The Fairies and the Realms of the Dead." Folklore. 81.2 (1970): 81-96. Print
69

reversal of the order of events: in Orfeo men die and are taken to the Fairy King’s courtyard by
magic123; in Coraline the children are brought to the other world by magic, if not explicitly
called magic, and then they die. The Fairy King is not, as far as we know, responsible for the
deaths of those in his courtyard; he only gathers them in to form his gruesome collection postmortem.
Coraline also shares something a bit more abstract with the three medieval texts of
chapter one, something which is not seen in A Midsummer Night’s Dream or in Peter Pan; this is
the means by which Faerie is entered (which, for our purposes, we can broaden to mean simply
the land which the fairies occupy primarily, so as to include places such as Gawain’s ultimate
destination in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, as well as the other mother’s house in
Coraline). In each of the medieval texts, Faerie is ultimately reached via a journey, however
lengthy, through the unknown. In Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Gawain sets out from
Camelot in his search for the Green Chapel months in advance; without a map or any knowledge
of the Green Chapel’s location, he spends much of this time wandering blindly in the wilderness,
inquiring of anyone he meets if they know where the Green Chapel might be.124 Ultimately he
comes out on the other side of this journey and arrives at the castle of Sir Bertilak, who,
unbeknownst to Gawain, is the Green Knight. Similarly, in Sir Orfeo Faerie is reached via a hole
or cleft in a rock through which Orfeo travels three miles before reaching the other side125 .
Similarly, in Tam Lin, though Janet never travels to Fairie herself, we know that it is located
underground beneath a green hill. These are distinctly different methods of ingress from those of
123

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 389-404

124

Armitage, vv. 703-5

125

“Sir Orfeo”, vv. 348-350
70

chapter two. In A Midsummer Night’s Dream the lovers set out from Athens deliberately,
heading directly for the forest outside the city limits and arriving in short order. They know its
location exactly. In Peter Pan there is a hint of uncertainty as the Darling children follow Peter
to Neverland; Peter, however, who acts as their guide, always knows where he’s going.
Moreover, as soon as they arrive at Neverland they immediately find parts of it that they
recognize: John’s flamingo with the broken leg, Michael’s cave, and Wendy’s wolf cub, among
others.126 Compare, then, Coraline’s journey into the other house with those from the earlier
texts. “Coraline put her hand on the doorknob and turned it; and, finally, she opened the door. It
opened on to a dark hallway. The bricks had gone as if they’d never been there. There was a
cold, musty smell coming through the open doorway: it smelled like something very old and very
slow.”127 Coraline’s journey is short, but distinctly in the medieval tradition. The door she uses
opens onto a hall where previously there had been bricks; the hallway itself is dark and cold, and
smells of something mysterious and unknown (“something very old and very slow”). Her
second trip is even more marked by these attributes. “The candle cast huge, strange, flickering
shadows along the wall. She heard something moving in the darkness— beside her or to one
side of her, she could not tell. It seemed as if it was keeping pace with her, whatever it was.”128
Coraline travels through a corridor of the unknown inhabited by similarly mysterious beings,
with, at least the first time, no knowledge of where she is going.
It is important, however, to note the differences as well as the similarities. After all,
though Coraline may harken back to an older, more medieval tradition of fairies, no work is
126

See Chapter 2, p. 51

127

Gaiman, p. 24

128

Gaiman, p. 57
71

created in a bubble, and the popular conception of fairies for the last four hundred years is
difficult to completely ignore. Though Coraline’s other mother has many things in common with
the fairies of chapter one, she does appear at first glance to be missing one: a connection to the
natural world. Though not explicitly remarked upon at first (as Coraline spends most of her time
inside the other house rather than exploring the grounds), it becomes clear on her second trip that
there is, in fact, no nature at all in the world of the other mother. In her quest for her parents,
Coraline leaves the other house and heads into the woods around it. “The trees (became) cruder
and less treelike the farther you went. Pretty soon they seemed very approximate, like the idea
of trees: a grayish-brown trunk below, a greenish splodge of something that might have been
leaves above. Coraline wondered if the other mother wasn’t interested in trees,”129 . The other
mother has barely bothered to include trees in her world, whereas Coraline’s real world includes
not only trees but fields and “distant purple hills”. 130 In this way, the other mother has more in
common perhaps with Peter Pan, her world molded from the protagonist’s imagination rather
than from nature.
But what if we take a less literal view of nature? Yes, the other world is devoid of natural
flora and fauna; however, part of the fairy association with nature is also an association with the
wild, the unknown, and specifically things that are ancient, naturally occurring, and not under
human control. Consider Coraline’s description of the corridor between worlds as she flees the
other mother for the final time. “Whatever that corridor was was older by far than the other
mother. It was deep, and slow, and it knew that she was there…”131 Similarly, when Coraline
129

Gaiman, p. 70

130

Gaiman, p. 28

131

Gaiman, p. 134
72

speaks with the cat she asks if the other mother made the other world, prompting the cat to give
(in true feline fashion) a rather ambiguous response: “Made it, found it—what’s the
difference?”132 These passages suggest that the other world itself, serving in the text as an
unspoken analogue for Faerie, is older even than the other mother, painting a picture of
something ancient and primordial, almost chthonic in nature. As man is to nature, so the other
mother is to the other world: a tenant, molding and shaping to her purpose, but not truly
possessing. The fairy world itself is deeper, older, and more wild than she.
If we do, then, treat the other world as something natural and wild, something not of
mankind, then Coraline’s actions immediately upon returning from her first visit take on a new
and greater significance. After arriving home in her real house she attempts and fails to replace
the key in its hiding place. Following this, “Coraline went to the freezer and took out the spare
loaf of frozen bread in the bottom compartment. She made herself some toast, with jam and
peanut butter… When it began to get dark, Coraline microwaved herself a frozen pizza. Then
Coraline watched television… She ate canned spaghetti for breakfast.” After this she goes to
visit Misses Spink and Forcible, who give her a glass of limeade. “The limeade was very
interesting. It didn’t taste anything like limes. It tasted bright green and vaguely chemical.
Coraline liked it enormously.”133 Coraline returns from her unsettling encounter with the other
world and immediately combats its lingering influence with copious amounts of man-made
products. She makes toast from frozen bread, microwaves herself a frozen pizza, watches
television, eats canned spaghetti, and drinks artificial limeade which is specifically divorced
from any natural connection it ought to have, tasting instead ‘vaguely chemical’. Fairies,
132

Gaiman, p. 73

133

Gaiman, pp. 47-48
73

especially those more in the folkloric or medieval traditions, have a long-standing relationship
with man-made, homely things, such as bread, milk, or iron. In most (though not all, as is often
the case with folklore) cases these things are inimical to them. For instance, in Child ballad
variant B of Tam Lin, when Tam Lin commands Janet to dip him in “a stand o milk;”134 in order
to dispel the fairy magic. Because the other mother and other world of Coraline are in the old
fairy tradition their influence can be resisted via these artifacts of civilisation.
One final note, perhaps, dealing not with the other mother and her connection to medieval
fairies, but rather with Coraline and her link to the medieval mortal protagonists. The heroes of
the medieval texts were, with one exception, knights (and though Janet is not a knight she plays
roughly the same role); the stories are largely composed of their wanderings into the wilderness,
away from the civilisation of home, court, and castle, seeking adventure. These wanderings,
however, are reactions to the provocations of the fairy element; their primary motive is not to
seek glory but to defend their world. Coraline follows in this tradition somewhat, but much as
the fairy’s bane, once cold iron, has been updated into microwaved pizza and chemical-tasting
limeade, so the questing knight has become something new to fit a new age: the explorer. “‘I do
hope she (Miss Spink) doesn’t get lost… you’d have to be an explorer to find your way around in
this fog.’ ‘I’m an explorer,’ said Coraline.”135 “I’m an explorer, thought Coraline to herself. And
I need all the ways out of here that I can get. So I shall keep walking.” “‘And what do you think
you’re doing?’ … ‘I’m exploring,’ said Coraline to the cat.”136 These are just some of the

134

"The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Variant B, v. 34

135

Gaiman, p. 13

136

Gaiman, p. 71
74

instances on which Coraline styles herself as an explorer before setting off into the unknown in
search of adventure, just as her medieval counterparts did.
There remains, however, one substantial difference, lying primarily in the mechanism of
the story and the fairies within it. In each of the medieval texts, the fairies act as catalysts of
sorts, sparking action, moving the hero away from civilisation and what they know; the Fairy
King kidnaps Heurodys, Tam Lin impregnates Janet, the Green Knight challenges Gawain. The
fairies begin the action, allowing the protagonists to finish it. This is not the case in Coraline.
Before ever any supernatural influence makes itself known, Coraline, entirely under her own
impetus, seeks out the key, unlocks the door, and enters Faerie of her own free will. Only once
she has learned of its dangers must she be forced back in through leverage; she, not the other
mother, initiates the action. Much like the incident of the Cottingley Fairies mentioned at the
end of the previous chapter, in which the girls sought fairies, unprompted, on their own, so the
protagonists of the modern age no longer need to be coaxed or prodded away from their world
and into Faerie. Rather than being drawn away by fairies, they actively seek them of their own
accord; this is the case in Coraline, and, as we will see, it is the case in Jonathan Strange & Mr.
Norrell as well, another text which relies more heavily on medieval fairies and on Tolkien’s ideas
of Faerie than on anything in the more modern, post-medieval tradition.
Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell, by Susanna Clarke, is as overt in its use of fairies as
Coraline is subtle. The events of the novel take place between 1806 and 1816 and tell the story
of two magicians, the titular characters, attempting to revive practical English magic, which has
lain dormant for some centuries at the time the story begins. The two, however, entertain very
different opinions on this revival, particularly as it relates to the employment of fairies in magic

75

(the conservative Mr. Norrell being against it, where the younger, newer Jonathan Strange
believes it to be imperative), as well as the legendary magician king of northern England, the
Raven King, John Uskglass. Where Gaiman draws upon a resurgence of more sinister fairy
themes to fuel his other mother without making use of any fairy traditions or lore by name,
Clarke’s fairies are called upon by name and brought nearly whole and fully formed out of the
pre-Shakespearean past.
The main fairy character, though others are mentioned or briefly seen, is referred to only
as the gentleman with the thistle-down hair, which is to say that his hair is of a pure silver-white
quality. He is the king of a fairy kingdom known as Lost-Hope, and first enters the story early
on when Mr. Norrell, eager to increase his fame (and thereby the fame of English magic) in
London, summons the gentleman in order to resurrect a young lady of the aristocracy (Lady
Pole), recently dead. In exchange, the Gentleman requests that he be allowed to aid Mr. Norrell
in all further magical endeavors. Norrell, reluctant to deal with a fairy in the first place, refuses.
The fairy agrees to instead take half of Lady Pole’s life in payment, and as a token of this
agreement takes from her the little finger on her left hand. However, where Norrell had
imagined she would live a full thirty-five years (the given time) among mortals, appear to die,
and then spend her remaining thirty-five years with the gentleman, the truth of the bargain is less
pleasant: she spends her days with her husband and family, but her nights she spends dancing
with the gentleman in his castle at Lost-Hope. This, among other things, brings him into
continual conflict with the magician protagonists, making him the antagonist of the novel, in
classic fairy tradition.

76

Everything about the characterization of the gentleman, from the broad strokes to the
minute details, smacks of the older, medieval style of fairies. However, where Gaiman’s use of
fairy traditions in Coraline makes much use of the sense of uncanny doubling so often present
between fairies and mortals, Clarke’s work (though not utterly devoid of this) draws more
heavily on a different element; to wit, the connection between fairies and nature or the land, and
specifically the way that this aspect of their nature is at odds with, often an assault on, man-made
civilisation137. This is present from the beginning and can be seen in the very name of the
primary fairy character: the gentleman with the thistle-down hair. Several different characters
who encounter him independently of each other describe him in this way, equating his most
prominent physical feature with a naturally occurring, growing substance, and moreover one for
which mankind has no use— unlike, for instance, flax or cotton. More than this, though, he is
from his introduction marked in similar fashion: “Suddenly there was something green where
nothing green had been before and a fresh, sweet smell as of woods and fields wafted through the
room…He was dressed exactly like any other gentleman, except that his coat was of the brightest
green imaginable – the colour of leaves in early summer.”138 Without fail nearly every
description of the gentleman employs some form of natural imagery (not to mention that his leafgreen coat is a traditional fairy garment). This sort of description appears to be applied to all
fairies, not just the gentleman; when Stephen Black, the servant of Sir Walter Pole of whom the
gentleman becomes fond, is taken to the revels at Lost-Hope, he dances with a beautiful woman

It is important to note that, while the post-Shakespearean fairies do exist in counter to the civilized world, their
contrast is more an affront than an assault; they thumb their nose at the man-made world, where the fairies of the
medieval texts boldly attack it; the fairies of Jonathan Strange are most definitely in the style of the second camp.
137

138

Clarke, Susanna. Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell. 2nd. New York: Bloomsbury, 2004. Print. p. 90
77

who wears a gown “the colour of storms, shadows and rain”139. The greater part of this
relationship between fairies, fairy magic and the natural world in Jonathan Strange is not limited
to passive descriptors of the fairies themselves, though. The gentleman on numerous occasions
openly displays his disdain for the world of men and its laws, saying at one point to Stephen:
“The laws of Great Britain! Pish tush! I thought you would have understood by now that the
laws of Great Britain are nothing but a flimsy testament to the idle wishes and dreams of
mankind.”140 The world of the gentleman, the world of Faerie, provides a clear and deliberate
contrast to the world of men, and not only a contrast but often an attack as well. Many times
when the gentleman spirits Stephen away to Lost-Hope via magic, he does so by transforming
the environment around him from London to Faerie — at least, this is how it appears to Stephen.
One early instance of this is particularly telling:
The stout gentleman opened his eyes wide in fright, anger and indignation. He opened his
mouth wide to begin accusing Stephen but in that moment he began to change. His body
became the trunk of a tree; he suddenly sprouted arms in all directions and all the arms
became branches; his face became a bole and he shot up twenty feet; where his hat and
umbrella had been there was a thick crown of ivy…Piccadilly was changing too. A
carriage happened to be passing. It clearly belonged to someone of importance for as well
as the coachman upon his box, two footmen rode behind; there was a coat of arms upon
the door and it was drawn by four matched greys. As Stephen watched the horses grew
taller and thinner until they seemed about to disappear entirely and at that point they were
suddenly transformed into a grove of delicate silver birches. The carriage became a holly
bush and the coachman and the footmen became an owl and two nightingales which
promptly flew away. The gas lamps that hung above the street were sucked up into the
sky and became stars in a fretwork of winter trees and Piccadilly itself dwindled to a
barely discernible path through a dark winter wood. (Clarke, 171)

139

Clarke, p. 162

140

Clarke, p. 793
78

The gentleman with the thistle-down hair’s magic is a direct assault by nature on the heart of the
man-made world: downtown London. The trappings of civilisation such as the elaborate
stagecoach and footmen are transformed into wild, natural things such as trees and animals.
Interestingly, the horses and a passing dog suffer the same fate. Though they are animals they
are also domesticated, and as such can be seen to have renounced their state as creatures of the
wild and become aspects of the man-made world.
Even minor fairies who feature in the book only in an indirect way via the in-world
folklore that Clarke has constructed follow this trend of behavior. At one point Norrell tells a
story to Strange of a fairy which, for whatever reason, was tormenting a small town. Among
other things, the fairy causes a wood to grow up in the market square, preventing the
townspeople from conducting business.141 In this way the fairy strikes at the civilised heart of
the town, its center of business, with wildness and nature.
This relationship with the wild is not limited just to fairies, though. Those human beings
who have a closeness, even if it is an unwitting one, to fairies and fairy magic enjoy such a
relationship as well. Another prominent fairy character in the novel is John Uskglass, the Raven
King and the ruler of northern England for three hundred years starting in 1110 AD, when he
invades England with a fairy host at his back. Though not technically a fairy, the Raven King
was raised from childhood in the court of a fairy king and employs fairy magic; on top of this he
enjoys a deep connection with the natural landscape of England. Vinculus, a vagrant and
charlatan sorcerer in the time in which the main events of Jonathan Strange take place, is tasked
through an unlikely series of events in childhood to deliver a prophecy of the Raven King to the

141

Clarke, p. 394
79

two magicians. He acts as the Raven King’s servant or emissary, and when Jonathan Strange
first encounters him he is waking from sleep under a hedge. “The man extracted himself from
the hedge. This was no easy task because various parts of it – hawthorn twigs, elder branches,
strands of ivy, mistletoe and witches’ broom – had insinuated themselves among his clothes,
limbs and hair during the night or glued themselves to him with ice.”142 Vinculus is a vehicle of
an older, more wild sort of magic, and as such the plants naturally cling to him, recognizing a
kinship in him which could never be seen in someone like Mr. Norrell who hides himself away in
libraries and wears a starched wig. Note the word choice used to describe the manner in which
the plants affix themselves to Vinculus: they do not cling, grasp, or wrap, but rather insinuate
themselves, implying a slow, natural process as if Vinculus were a part of the landscape itself.
Perhaps the scene which best sums up the relationship between civilisation and fairies,
among other things, is Jonathan Strange’s visit to the ailing king, George III. The king’s sons
summon Strange in the hope that Strange might be able to cure his majesty’s madness through
magic, though Strange has little hope. However, unbeknownst to the magician, the gentleman
with the thistle-down hair is visiting as well, and attempts to lure them both from the castle
grounds into Faerie via an enchantment. “Strange was mystified. The music seemed to be
leading the King in the direction of a grove of trees. At least Strange had supposed it was a
grove… But now the grove had become a thicket – no, a wood – a deep, dark wood where the
trees were ancient and wild. Their great branches resembled twisted limbs and their roots
tumbling nests of snakes… Pale pinpricks of light deep within the wood suggested a house
where no house ought to be.”143 The forests of fairy are ‘ancient and wild’, and their trees are
142

Clarke, p. 214

143

Clarke, p. 388
80

best described with sinister, threatening metaphors comparing their branches to human limbs and
their roots to poisonous serpents. Though Strange sees lights which suggest there might be a
house (most probably Lost-Hope), the forest is a place “where no house ought to be”. The house
is the ultimate embodiment of homeliness and civilisation; it has no business existing in Faerie,
the heart and expression of untamed wildness. The narration says as much shortly afterwards,
once Strange has dispelled the enchantment that had begun to make the wood and house seem
warm and welcoming. “The wood no longer struck Strange as a welcoming place. It appeared
to him now as it had at first — sinister, unknowable, unEnglish.”144 This one sentence says a
great deal about the relationship between Faerie and England, and indeed between fairies and
mankind; fairies and everything to do with them is, as Clarke uses them and as they were in the
pre-Shakespearean tradition, sinister and unknowable. To say that they are unEnglish is, within
the context of the book, to say that they are not of the civilised world which Strange (at that
point) inhabits, the world which he feels constitutes Englishness.
In the contrast and conflict between fairies in Jonathan Strange, as agents of the wild,
and the agents of civilisation and the man-made world, the fairy side is not limited solely to
nature. It never has been. Fairies are connected to the natural world, but in a broader sense they
are connected as well to things that are unknown and unknowable; most often death, as in Sir
Orfeo, and insanity. For instance, during Strange’s visit to George III it is revealed that madmen
can see fairies, even when the fairies do not wish themselves to be seen; Norrell later explains to
Strange that fairies have historically had an affinity for insane persons.145 Not only fairies, but
tellingly the Aureate (Golden-Age) magicians as well, which is to say those whose magic was
144

Clarke, p. 390

145

Clarke, p. 393
81

most closely derived from John Uskglass, whose magic and upbringing was in turn learned from
fairies. All this is perhaps best summed up by one of Clarke’s footnotes referencing imaginary
works of magical scholarship.
Richard Chaston (1620-95). Chaston wrote that men and fairies both contain within them
a faculty of reason and a faculty of magic. In men reason is strong and magic is weak.
With fairies it is the other way round: magic comes very naturally to them, but by human
standards they are barely sane. (Clarke, 393)
This relationship between civilisation and the unknown, sanity and madness, is interestingly
mixed in the character of Strange himself. From the beginning Strange is somewhat less
invested in civilisation than Mr. Norrell, preferring haphazard experimentation to careful
research and adventuring in the field to studying in the library. However, as the novel progresses
he becomes more and more enamored of fairies and of English magic’s wilder past, and more
and more disenchanted with London and Norrell’s way of doing things which favors research
over experimentation and the quiet of a library over the roar of a battlefield. During a
conversation with Sir Walter Pole, Strange expresses a desire to escape London. “‘There are
days when I would be away.’ ‘Where?’ Sir Walter was surprized; there was no place he found so
much to his liking as London with its gaslights and its shops, its coffeehouses and clubs, its
thousand pretty women and its thousand varieties of gossip and he imagined it must be the same
for everyone. ‘Oh, wherever men of my sort used to go, long ago. Wandering on paths that other
men have not seen. Behind the sky. On the other side of the rain.’”146 Sir Walter, not only a
man of society but a nobleman and a politician, is so thoroughly entrenched in the man-made
world of the city that he cannot even imagine wanting to leave. Strange, however, is expressing
the beginnings of a growing desire to explore the magical unknown, primarily in the form of
146

Clarke, p. 406
82

fairy magic and John Uskglass, and to escape his role in society. This can perhaps be considered
to culminate during his time in Venice when, in order to enable himself to see fairies, he distills a
tincture of madness which renders him temporarily insane.147 The first turning point of Strange’s
relationship with fairies and the wild is perhaps best encapsulated, however, by something
related not to madness but to the doubling which we saw in earlier texts and in Coraline.
The doubling in Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell has nothing like the pervasive potency it
does in Coraline. Though the gentleman with the thistle-down hair is, admittedly, the same
height as Jonathan Strange148, there are not strong recurring parallels drawn between the two, or
between Faerie and what we see of England; indeed, the two could hardly be more different, the
Faerie wood being described as thoroughly “unEnglish”.149 No, the doubling we see here is
represented not by fairies who resemble their mortal counterparts but by mirrors. Mirrors are,
after all, in some ways the ultimate instance of an uncanny double: a perfect reflection, but
reversed, backwards. From early in the book, Jonathan Strange, the character who most
successfully bridges the gap between the world of men and the world of fairies, is intent on
blurring the line between reflection and reality. In his second meeting with Mr. Norrell upon his
arrival in London, for instance, Strange is asked to do a piece of magic. In answer, Strange
causes a book on the table to switch places with its reflection, leaving only a hologram of a book
sitting where the physical book had been.150 The greatest instance of this penchant of Strange’s
for mirror magic, however, comes later in the book. During the discussion between Sir Walter

147

Clarke, p. 643

148

Clarke, p. 277

149

Clarke, p. 390

150

Clarke, p. 250
83

Pole quoted above, Strange first expresses a desire to pass through a mirror. “‘Does it not look
as if one could just walk into it? It would not be so difficult I think. One could use a spell of
revelation. No, of unravelling. Or perhaps both. The way would be clear before one. One step
forward and away.’” 151 A short while later Strange does just this, walking into the mirror and
going elsewhere, greatly perturbing his wife and friends. By passing into the mirror, Strange
unites his reflection with himself, eliminating the border between the uncanny double, which is
fairy, and the man. Interestingly enough, just as in the medieval texts the approach to Faerie is
preceded by a journey through the unknown, once through the mirror Strange finds himself in
just such a place.
“There were canals of still water in stone embankments. The water appeared black in the
gloomy light. I saw staircases that rose up so high I could not see the top of them, and others
that descended into utter blackness. Then suddenly I passed under an arch and found myself
upon a stone bridge that crossed a dark, empty landscape. The bridge was so vast that I could not
see the end of it” … Only Strange seemed at all comfortable with these descriptions of eerie,
silent halls, unending pathways, and vast, dark landscapes. Arabella was genuinely frightened by
what she had heard and even Sir Walter and Colonel Grant felt decidedly unsettled. Magic,
which had seemed so familiar just hours before, so English, had suddenly become inhuman,
unearthly, otherlandish. (Clarke, 428)
Once Strange unites his human self with his fairy self and passes through the unknown world
behind the mirror his magic itself is transformed, turning from traditional English magic to
something decidedly other.
In Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell, fairies come crashing back with full force into their
old roles, both as powerful, dangerous antagonists and as guardians and personifications of
nature, wilderness, and the unknown. The fairies may be old, however, but the protagonists are,
in many ways, a new breed. They are very much possessed of the same lust for adventure

151

Clarke, p. 405-6
84

embodied by questing knights in the medieval tradition. It seems, however, that the questing
knights can rely upon the fairy element to inevitably intrude into their world and draw them out
into some sort of conflict or quest, away from civilisation and into the depths of Faerie. In many
ways, Jonathan Strange himself may be considered to represent both the modern reader of fairy
literature and the updated form of the questing knight. As in Coraline, and as opposed to all the
mortal protagonists of the first two chapters, Strange is not content to wait for fairies to approach
him. Instead, he is intent on seeking both fairies and all incarnations of the unknown. “‘To
confine a magician’s researches to the books in his library,’” Strange says, “‘well, you might just
as well tell an explorer that you approve his plan to search for the source of, of — whatever it is
those African rivers are called — on the condition that he never step outside Tunbridge
Wells!’”152 Strange, like Coraline, thinks of himself as an explorer, a seeker of mysteries and
adventure. And like Coraline (where her initial journey into the other world causes the other
mother to kidnap her parents), this insistence on venturing into realms where he does not belong
ultimately results in the loss of a loved one, after his wife, Arabella, is kidnapped by the
gentleman with the thistle-down hair.
In a way these books, though they owe much of their fairy elements to the medieval
traditions of Sir Orfeo, Tam Lin, and Sir Gawain & the Green Knight (which had so long lain
dormant under the post-medieval small fairy tradition), have turned the structure of those stories
on their heads. Orfeo, for instance, begins with the kidnapping of a loved one, forcing the main
character to leave the comforts of civilisation and home and seek adventure and the unknown.
Jonathan Strange and Coraline, on the other hand, feature protagonists who, by tempting fate

152

Clarke, p. 428
85

and going of their own free will into the dark, ultimately endanger their loved ones and are
forced to save them. This is because the motivations of the contemporary protagonists are the
reverse of those of the medieval ones. The medieval heroes of chapter one are acutely aware of
the unknown which surrounds them; they spend their time working their hardest to defend
against it and drive it off. The modern protagonists of Jonathan Strange and Coraline, on the
other hand, welcome fairies in with open arms, looking for an adventure, something which they
do not already know completely, something of which they are not entirely sure. The
contemporary protagonists (that is to say, protagonists who are the products of contemporary
writers. Jonathan Strange is, after all, set in the beginning of the 19th century; its author is a
product of the late 20th), on the other hand, appear to feel, in the tradition of the Cottingley girls,
that if they do not take the initiative and seek out fairies, the fairies will never come to them.
Unlike the Cottingley girls, however, who were in search of small, post-medieval fairies, the
fairies which these modern protagonists encounter prove a great deal more dangerous than they
had expected.

86

Conclusion

Fairies are complex things (as anything which exists for so long must, by necessity, be)
and one could not hope to encompass all that they are in a lifetime of work, let alone such a short
work as this. Nevertheless, the recurring themes and roles which fairies play in literature say a
great deal about them, especially since there is no reality of fairies to contradict their portrayal;
there is only the portrayal itself. We see fairies change, as anything can be expected to over the
course of six centuries, but in many ways we see them stay the same as well. They are, in their
most basic form, the embodiment of the unknown, to the things which mankind is unable to
understand, both in the world around us and in ourselves. At the same time, being of human
genesis, they reflect our changing attitudes towards that unknown. In the Middle Ages, we see
Gawain riding off to defend the honor of Camelot from the challenge of the uncivilised unknown
embodied by the Green Knight. In the post-medieval era, that same unknown becomes
something to be understood and ultimately, just as Wendy attempts to civilise Peter, to be
subdued to the will of the hero. Finally in the modern era we see heroes realize that the unknown
has a place in their world after all and welcome it back in with open arms, only to realize, as
Coraline does, that it is not so toothless as we thought after all. In every instance, fairies are the
face we give to that unknown, the one we wish it had, whether as another knight, something
small and manageably classifiable, or something beautiful and longed-for. They transform the
unknown into something that we feel we can venture into after all. In every instance as well,
once we enter that world we realize that the faces we give them never quite manage to mask the
true face we know them to possess: that of something fierce, wild, and implacable. In the

87

introduction, I ask why it is that fairies so doggedly persist after more than six hundred years.
The answer is simple: it is because the unknown which they represent— whether that unknown
is the shadowed forests primeval of the natural world or the darker recesses of our own minds—
persists. It always has, and it always will.

88

Works Cited
Castaldo, Annalisa, “‘No More Yielding than a Dream’: The Construction of Shakespeare in
‘The Sandman.’” College Literature, Vol. 31, No. 4, Shakespeare and Popular Culture (Fall,
2004), pp. 94-110
Gaiman, Neil. Coraline. 2nd ed. New York: HarperTrophy, 2003. Print.
Shakespeare, William. A Midsummer Night's Dream. 8th ed. New Haven: Yale UP, 1960. Print.
The Yale Shakespeare.
Armitage, Simon. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight: A New Verse Translation. 1st ed. New
York: W.W. Norton, 2007. Print.
Barrie, J. M. Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens ; Peter and Wendy. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008.
Print.
Clarke, Susanna. Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell. 2nd. New York: Bloomsbury, 2004. Print.
Allingham, William (2012-05-17). Sixteen Poems. Kindle Edition.
Child, Francis J., ed. "The Child Ballads: 39. Tam Lin." Internet Sacred Text Archive. N.p., n.d.
Web. 28 Apr. 2013. <http://www.sacred-texts.com/neu/eng/child/ch039.htm>.
Laskaya, Anne, and Eve Salisbury, eds. "Sir Orfeo." Teams Middle English Texts Series.
University of Rochester, n.d. Web. 28 Apr. 2013.
<http://www.lib.rochester.edu/camelot/teams/orfeo.htm>.
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Hobbit. 4th. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1996. Print.
Tolkien, J. R. R. “On Fairy Stories.” The Monsters and the Critics: The Essays of J.R.R. Tolkien.
London: HarperCollins, 1997. Print.
Purkiss, Diana. At the Bottom of the Garden: A History of Fairies, Hobgoblins and Other
Troublesome Things. New York, NY: New York University Press, 2001. Print.
Freud, Sigmund. (1919h). Das Unheimliche. Imago, 5: 297-324; GW, 12: 229-268; The
"uncanny," SE, 17: 217-256
Coulton, G.G. Social Life in Britain from the Conquest to the Reformation. London: Cambridge
University Press, 1918. 395-96, 404, 409. Print.

Jirsa, Curtis. "In the Shadow of the Ympe-tre: Arboreal Folklore in Sir Orfeo." English Studies.
89.2 (2008): 141-151. JSTOR. Web.
K.M. Briggs, “The Fairies and the Realms of the Dead”. Folklore, Vol. 81, No. 2 (Summer,
1970), pp. 81-96. JSTOR. Web.
K.M. Briggs, “The English Fairies”. Folklore , Vol. 68, No. 1 (Mar., 1957), p. 270-287. JSTOR.
Web.
"Morgan le Fay in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight", Albert B. Friedman, Speculum , Vol. 35,
No. 2 (Apr., 1960), pp. 260-274
Evans-Wentz, W.Y. The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press, 1911. Print.
Green, Roger Lancelyn. "Shakespeare and the Fairies." Folklore. 73.2 (1962): 89-103. Print
O'Conor, Norreys Jephson. "The Early Irish Fairies and Fairyland." Sewanee Review. 28.4
(1920): 556. Print.
Sanderson, S.F. "The Cottingley Fairy Photographs: A Re-Appraisal of the Evidence." Folklore.
84.2 (1973): 89-103. Print.
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Hobbit. 4th. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1996. Print.

Bibliography
Weston, Jessie L., trans. "Anon., Sir Orfeo (Middle English, tr. into Modern English (Breton
Lay)." Geoffrey Chaucer Website. Harvard University, 3 July 2000. Web. 28 Apr. 2013. <http:/
www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~chaucer/special/litsubs/breton/orfeo.html>.
Kirk, Robert, and Andrew Lang. The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns and Fairies.
London: David Nutt, in the Strand, 1893. Print.
Yeats, W.B. Fairy & Folk Tales of Ireland. New York, NY: Collier Books, 1973. Print.
Wood, Juliette. "The Fairy Bride Legend in Wales." Folklore. 103.1 (1992): 56-72. Print.
Wasserman, Julian. "Alchemy and Transformation in the Ballad Tam Lin." Mississippi Folklore
Register. 15.1 (1981): 27. Print.
Courtney, M.A. "Cornish Folk-Lore, Part III." Folk-Lore Journal. 5.3 (1887): 177-200. Print.

Gooding, Richard. "'Something Very Old And Very Slow': Coraline, Uncanniness, And Narrative
Form." Children's Literature Association Quarterly 33.4 (2008): 390-407. MLA International
Bibliography. Web. 5 Apr. 2013.
Rudd, David. "An Eye For An I: Neil Gaiman's Coraline And Questions Of Identity." Children's
Literature In Education: An International Quarterly 39.3 (2008): 159-168. MLA International
Bibliography. Web. 5 Apr. 2013.
Gros Louis, Kenneth R.R., “The Significance of Sir Orfeo’s Self-Exile.” The Review of English
Studies, New Series, Vol. 18, No. 71 (Aug., 1967) pp. 245-252. JSTOR. Web. 28th Apr. 2013
Wheatley, Henry B. “The Folklore of Shakespeare”. Folklore, Vol. 27, No. 4 (Dec. 31, 1916), pp.
378-407. JSTOR. Web. Accessed 26/11/2012.
Sayce, R.U. “The Origins and Development of the Belief in Fairies”. Folklore, Vol. 45, No. 2
(Jun., 1934), pp. 99-143. JSTOR. Web. Accessed 26/11/2012.

