Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Fall 2014

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2014

A Study in Sherlock Holmes and Adaptability:
Looking For Clues as to What Makes Watson,
Adler, and Moriarty Endure
Molly Panarotti Feibel
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Feibel, Molly Panarotti, "A Study in Sherlock Holmes and Adaptability: Looking For Clues as to What Makes Watson, Adler, and
Moriarty Endure" (2014). Senior Projects Fall 2014. Paper 17.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_f2014/17

This On-Campus only is brought to you for free and open access by the
Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital Commons. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Fall 2014 by an authorized
administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

A Study in Sherlock Holmes and Adaptability:
Looking For Clues as to What Makes Watson, Adler and Moriarty Endure

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
Of Bard College

By
Molly Feibel

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
December 2014

Acknowledgements
Thank you to Professors Lianne Habinek and Matthew Mutter
For acting as my advisors during my time here at Bard College and helping me make the
right decisions both in class choices and deciding to go abroad
Thank you to my friends
For letting me play the “Yeah, but I have a giant Senior Project” Card over and over again
whenever they complained about schoolwork
Thank you to everyone in my Center Family
For letting me sit quietly n the corner at rehearsals so this could get done while I was away
from Netflix
Thank you to my brother, Stefan
For reading quotes out loud to me when I couldn’t read and type at the same time
Thank you to my Dad
For giving me a sounding board and for always offering new and interesting sources to
consider
Thank you to my Mom
For being the fresh pair of eyes I needed when this project began to blur in front of me
Thank you to the staff of Stevenson Library
For keeping me employed and always checking in on me throughout this process
Thank you to all the friends I made here at Bard
For making these last four (and a half) years so enjoyable
Thank you to all my professors at Bard
For teaching me about all sorts of topics that I never would have discovered on my own
Thank you to Professor Deirdre d’Albertis
For getting me interested in Victorian Literature and all the help you give us Literature
Seniors
Thank you to Professor Karen Sullivan
For always knowing how to help me get this done, for all the encouragement, and for
sharing my enthusiasm about Sherlock Holmes
Finally, thank you to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
For creating Sherlock Holmes, though in actuality
“I am weary of [both of their] names”

Table of Contents

Introduction:
The Puzzle of Why Sherlock Holmes is Still Around Today
Despite the Best Efforts of His Creator ..............................................................................1
Chapter One
The Case of the Sidekick:
In Which John Watson Proves to be Holmes’ Perfect Match
and a Hero in His Own Right............................................................................................... 13
Chapter Two
The Adventure of the Woman:
In Which Irene Adler Endures Because She is a Boundary Pushing,
Modern Woman in Any Time or Place ............................................................................ 59
Chapter Three
The Problem of the Villain:
In Which Moriarty is Not Holmes’ Polar Opposite,
But the Yin to His Yang ......................................................................................................... 93
Conclusion
The Final Problem .............................................................................................................. 122
Bibliography ...................................................................................................................................... 125

1

Introduction
The Puzzle of Why Sherlock Holmes is Still Around Today Despite the
Best Efforts of His Creator
“I fear that Mr. Sherlock Holmes may become like one of those popular tenors
who, having outlived their time, are still tempted to make
repeated farewell bows to their indulgent audiences”
(Doyle “Preface” to “The Case Book of Sherlock Holmes”)

Sherlock Holmes: No doubt you have heard of him. The now-famous detective first
appeared on the scene in 1887 in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s novel, A Study in Scarlet.
Following that debut another Holmes novel was published, titled The Sign of Four. While
both received moderate attention, Sherlock Holmes’ popularity skyrocketed with the
publication of Doyle’s stories in The Strand Magazine. Starting in July of 1891, The Strand
published the first in a series of short stories, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, to great
acclaim:
“A Scandal in Bohemia” appeared in July’s Strand, and the public’s reaction was all
that the author, editor, and delighted publisher could hope for. Ingeniously, the
story’s titillating details played to the public fascination with royal scandals,
sparking widespread speculation as to the real identities of the characters. At a
stroke, Conan Doyle became one of the most famous writers in Britain. (Doyle,
Arthur Conan Doyle: A Life in Letters (ALiL) 293)
We learn from The Strand’s website that in his autobiography, Doyle admitted he had
specifically written the short stories in order to get himself established in The Strand
(www.strandmag.com). One of the major advantages of printing stories in such a magazine

2
was the fact that novels, such as The Hound of the Baskervilles, could be serialized. Since
readers received only parts of the story with each issue of the magazine, the suspense and
excitement about what would happen next guaranteed even more readership. Even before
Holmes encountered the hound in 1901, the readers and fans of the stories proved just how
much they cared about the character. In 1893, Doyle wrote to his mother, Mary Doyle and
said, “I am in the middle of the last Holmes story, after which the gentleman vanishes, never
to reappear. I am weary of his name1” (Doyle ALiL 319). Doyle was referring to writing
“The Final Problem”, a story which ends with Sherlock Holmes and his arch nemesis
Moriarty apparently going over the Reichenbach Falls to a watery grave together. At this
time, Doyle had grown sick of only writing detective stories and planned to retire Holmes,
in a very permanent way. The killing off of the great detective seemed not at all dramatic
for Doyle who supposedly “scribbled ‘Killed Holmes’ laconically in his notebook” (Doyle
ALiL 324). For fans, it was a much more devastating event. Rumor has it that readers wore
black armbands to signify their mourning for the fictional detective. Eventually, something2
got to Doyle and he resurrected the detective for more stories and two more novels. One of
the novels is arguably the most famous, The Hound of the Baskervilles.
Perhaps this devotion of fans and readers helps us understand why we have seen so
many adaptations of the consulting detective through the years. One of the most notable
incarnations of Holmes was Basil Rathbone, who voiced the detective, with Nigel Bruce as
Dr. Watson on “The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes” radio program, during the early
1940s. This pairing also appeared as Holmes and Watson onscreen in a series of fourteen
films, starting with The Hound of the Baskervilles. Sherlock Holmes has also been a
1
2

Now that acknowledgement makes sense, does it not?
Be it pressure from the fans or the promise of more money from the publishers.

3
recurring character on television. Among the most famous of these portrayals is that of
Jeremy Brett. in The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes on Granada Television from 1984 to
1994, with Watson played by David Burke and, eventually, Edward Hardwicke. This series
covered all of the Holmes stories except eighteen, and those were omitted only because
Brett suffered a heart attack in 1995. Since these adaptations, which are pretty faithful to
Doyle’s original stories, audiences have seen Holmes transported into new times and
places. In 1999, for example, viewers were introduced to Sherlock Holmes in the 22nd
Century. This was an animated series that saw Holmes brought back to fighting form
through cellular rejuvenation. For the purposes of this project, however, the main focus will
be on two of the most recent television adaptations of Doyle’s canon.
In July of 2010, the BBC premiered the first episode of Sherlock, titled “A Study in
Pink”. This series was created by Steven Moffat and Mark Gatiss, and features a Sherlock
Holmes who lives in London in the twenty-first century. Benedict Cumberbatch stars as
Sherlock while Martin Freeman is featured as John Watson. A couple of years later, CBS
introduced its response to the ever-present popularity of Holmes. Elementary premiered
on September 27, 2012 and again had Sherlock and Watson in the present day, but this
time they were located in New York. This series was created by Robert Doherty and
featured a major change to the original canon: a female Watson played by Lucy Liu to work
opposite Johnny Lee Miller’s Sherlock. The popularity of these series – Sherlock has won
several BAFTA3 awards4 and Elementary has been nominated for People’s Choice Awards5

3

British Academy of Film and Television Awards.
Sherlock won Best Drama Series in 2011, Martin Freeman won Best Supporting Actor in
2011
5 Nominated for Favorite New TV Drama in 2012

4

4
and Primetime Emmy Awards6- demonstrates to us how engagingly adaptable Sherlock
Holmes is to new settings. But why does this character endure? More importantly, why
does he endure in such a way that makes the stories of his adventures so conducive to
updating? The answer to these questions seems to lie in the fact that when Doyle created
Sherlock Holmes, he also created a new and timeless kind of hero.
Thirty years before A Study in Scarlet was published, Thomas Hughes wrote a book
entitled Tom Brown’s Schooldays (1857). The titular character represented a very typical
kind of Victorian hero. When Tom Brown goes off to school, there is a hope for what he will
grow up to be: “If he’ll only turn out a brave, helpful, truth-telling Englishman, and a
gentleman, and a Christian, that’s all I want” (Hughes 74). This focus on piety and honor is
very characteristic of the Victorian hero. But there is another focus in this story, and that is
on physical prowess. The boys at Rugby – Tom’s school – attend to bettering their minds
and their bodies so that they can go on to become strong Christian men when they grow up.
Many of Tom’s classmates eventually join the army and within Hughes’ novel, they all
compete in cricket matches. This novel and several others of the time created a term
known as “muscular Christianity.” This is defined as “a Christian life of brave and cheerful
physical activity.” It takes the idea of a pious hero and adds a physical element most likely
geared specifically towards young men. Before Doyle’s Holmes appeared on the literary
scene, we saw a precedent of heroes with religious tendencies as well as physical prowess
and strong ideas of what masculinity is.
Enter Holmes. Doyle’s creation does not share many qualities with the previously
established heroic figure. First of all, he never out and out declares himself a religious man.

6

Nominated for Main title Design and Theme Music in 2013

5
Occasionally he makes passing reference to religion, such as in The Hound of the
Baskervilles when he says, “In a modest way I have combated evil, but to take on the Father
of Evil himself would, perhaps, be too ambitious a task” (Doyle The Complete Sherlock
Holmes Volume I (CSH) 681). This makes it seem as though Holmes believes in something
such as the Devil, but in reality he is most likely playing along with his client who is only
thinking only of supernatural possibilities for the strange happenings7 on the moor.
Christianity is not a part of who Holmes is; he does not fulfill the pious requirement found
in many literary heroes who came before him.
Holmes also distinguishes himself in that he is not aspiring to some higher goal. We
do not watch him grow from a rowdy young boy to a refined young man, nor do we see a
man seeking to achieve a higher rank. Holmes, as far as we know, probably comes from a
fairly well-off family; he is highly educated and we learn that his brother holds a position in
the British government. But Holmes seems to have no aspirations to become Sir Sherlock
Holmes or to amass any great wealth. Over the course of the canon, he mainly lives in a flat
on Baker Street and requires a flat mate to help him pay for it. Similarly, he does not seek
glory when he does what he does: solve cases. Whenever Watson writes about their taking
on cases that deal with national security or the royal family, those details are glossed over.
In fact, Holmes even meets Queen Victoria herself at one point but she is only included in
the story as “a certain gracious lady” (Doyle CSH 931). Holmes works as a consulting
detective and usually helps the police when they are at their wits end, which is quite often.
Even when he lends a hand, however, he does not take credit for what he has done. At the

7

Footprints and strange sounds that seem to point to a gigantic hound.

6
end of The Sign of Four, Watson expresses his disappointment that Holmes seems to have
done all of the work for none of the rewards:
The division seems rather unfair. You have done all the work in this business. I get a
wife out of it, Jones gets the credit, pray what remains for you? (Doyle CSH 158)
Holmes responds, “for me, there still remains the cocaine bottle” (Doyle CSH 158). Holmes
is a drug addict, which further sets him apart from the typical hero. After all, you never
caught Tom Brown going to his snuffbox when boredom set in. Thus far we have a man
who has no specific ties to any divine being, a man who eschews glory or fame or
recognition, and a man who frequently uses drugs. But this does not mean Holmes is not a
hero; he is just a new kind of hero. He is an intellectual hero, not a physical warrior and not
a pious and determined go-getter. Holmes demonstrates his heroism through his
intelligence. He solves cases by thinking things through logically and clearly. He observes
what others, mainly Watson and the police, do not. That kind of heroism lends itself to
being adapted and re-imagined in any era.
In addition to differing from the traditional early Victorian hero, Holmes also
represents a seemingly updated version of another Victorian hero. Philosopher Thomas
Carlyle endeavored to define this hero in his book On Heroes, Hero-Worship & the Heroic in
History (1841). He writes:
They were the leaders of men, these great ones, the modelers, patterns, and in a
wide sense creators, of whatsoever the general mass of men contrived to do or to
attain; all things that we see standing accomplished in the world are properly the
outer material result, the practical realization and embodiment, of Thoughts that
dwell in the Great Men sent to the world…(Carlyle 3)

7
“Great Men” and “heroes” for Carlyle are men who, through their massive impact,
essentially create the world in which others live. They grace the world with their presence
and the world is better for their contributions. Throughout the book, Carlyle identifies as
heroes political leaders such as Cromwell and Napoleon as, religious leaders such as
Mahomet, and Gods such as Odin. The Carlylian hero is identified as such by the mark he
makes on the world. And, in his own quiet way, Holmes does change the world. The big
difference, however, is that Carlyle’s “Great Man” is simply the top of the pyramid. He is the
man who comes up with the great ideas and then other people make them a reality. For
Carlyle, there is the “Great Man” - and then everyone else. As we will discuss in greater
detail in Chapter One, Holmes does not fit this idea of the “Great Man”. He is not alone. In
fact, he not even alone in his status as a “Great Man”, John Watson seems to be up there as
well.
So, we begin to see why it is that Holmes endures. He is an appealingly adaptable
kind of hero – the kind that uses his mind and is not defined by his use of period-specific
tools. He also is not tethered to period standards, either of the traditional Victorian hero, or
the Carlylian figure. This allows him to move more comfortably in non-Victorian settings.
Though Holmes represents a new kind of hero, he clearly is not the only character to
survive from the Victorian era. Vampires, for example, are a hot commodity within today’s
popular culture. With the publication of Stephanie Meyer’s Twilight series and the
popularity of vampire television shows such as Buffy the Vampire Slayer or The Vampire
Diaries, the bloodsucking fiends seem to be everywhere. But one name stands out above
others: Dracula. Created by Bram Stoker in 1897, the Count travels from Transylvania to
England in the hopes of finding blood and spreading vampirism. Jonathan Harker, Abraham

8
Van Helsing, and Mina Harker attempt to destroy him before he succeeds. With a title
character who can literally survive forever, barring a staking or burning, it seems highly
likely that Dracula could be updated to fit into any setting. If we look at recent popular film
adaptations, however, this is not the case. In 2004, Hugh Jackman took on the title role in
the film Van Helsing. This film shows the vampire hunter tracking down and killing Count
Dracula - in the late nineteenth century, just like Stoker’s novel. In 2014, a film was
released called Dracula Untold, which creates an origin story for the character of Dracula
beginning in the Middle Ages. Towards the end of the film, the characters enter the present
day, but most of the action takes place long ago. So we see a definite tendency to place
stories about Dracula in the past. The same applies to a figure such as Charlotte Brontë’s
Jane Eyre. There have been many film adaptations of Jane Eyre but they are never
modernized or relocated to the states. Holmes seems to be the only figure to be constantly
adapted and moved into new locations.
This seems to be because Holmes is not a product of his time in the same way as
Dracula or Jane Eyre. Nowadays, there is a greater skepticism about something like
vampires so it less believable that a group of doctors would endeavor to hunt one. Also
today, there is much greater mobility for a woman, and someone like Jane Eyre would have
career options other than teacher or governess. And Mr. Rochester? He could simply
divorce his insane wife rather than locking her in an attic. But Holmes is different than all
this. The essential qualities that define his character and the appeal of his stories are not
specific to the Victorian era. What makes Holmes Holmes is his intellect, and intellect is
always present and important in society. The information and the way he discovers it may
change with the times, but his core methodology does not. Sherlock’s detective uses a smart

9
phone and the Internet to track down clues where Doyle’s original creation used a
magnifying glass and strategically placed ads in the paper. But Holmes’ use of logic and
observation are as useful now as they were then, just employing different secondary tools..
And the stories themselves are also completely uproot-able. Crime will always be present,
no matter where the detective is located. Holmes has fewer specific ties to the time in
which he was created, so his accidental characteristics can be more fluid. All of this makes
it easy for us to re-imagine him in the present day or in another location.
Of course, Holmes is not the only one from Doyle’s stories to endure. John Watson,
Irene Adler, and Moriarty all are figures that we see time and again in adaptations of
Doyle’s original canon. What makes these three characters so important and adaptable that
they can consistently exist alongside the famed detective? Similar to Holmes, they all seem
to represent new ways of looking at existing heroic tropes – the sidekick, the woman, and
the villain - as well as being characters that exist outside of their time.
First, we have Doctor John Watson. To the casual observer, Doctor Watson appears
to be Sherlock Holmes’ sidekick. On the surface, he seems never to be to be as smart as
Holmes, or on the same level as the detective in any sense. But just as Holmes is a new kind
of hero, Watson is much more than he appears. As we will explore in Chapter One, Doctor
John H. Watson is a hero in his own right. He is no one’s sidekick and he proves himself to
be on a level playing field with Holmes time and again. Within the modern world of the
BBC’s Sherlock, we see the addition of the potential for a romantic relationship between the
two men, but once again John is not even close to a sidekick. In that particular incarnation,
John and Sherlock are not only equals: they are men who complete one another. Being
together makes each of them a better man and we see the humanization of Sherlock even as

10
we see the saving of John. CBS’s Elementary throws us for a loop with a female Watson. Yet,
she too is neither inferior nor a traditional sidekick to Sherlock. In the case of that
particular show, the dynamic between the two characters takes on a pedagogical tone with
Sherlock teaching Watson to follow in his footsteps and become a detective in her own
right. Doyle’s Watson also shows his adaptability by being a man freshly home from the
war, a man with no familial ties or societal ties to keep him grounded in Victorian England.
This quality is reflected in Sherlock’s Watson, likewise an unattached veteran at the start of
the series, and in Elementary’s Joan Watson, who finds herself somewhat adrift after
leaving her medical practice.
The next trope is that of the woman. Usually in adventure stories, we see female
characters either as the love interest of the hero or as the damsel in distress figure for the
hero to save. Irene Adler is neither of these things – or both of them and more. She is
described as a beautiful woman but there is absolutely no question of her becoming a
trophy wife for Sherlock Holmes. Similarly, she is not the one to come asking for the
detective’s help; instead, she is the reason a royal figure comes to Holmes and Watson.
Though no specific crime is ever committed in her story, “A Scandal in Bohemia”, Irene is
most definitely the adversary of the tale - and she outwits Holmes. Again we see the
addition of a sexual component when watching Sherlock. This incarnation of Irene is a
dominatrix who uses her sexuality to try and manipulate everyone around her. The
episode, “A Scandal in Belgravia” has her fluctuating between being all types of women. She
is at times the damsel in distress, at times the flirtation partner, and at times the
intellectual equal. On Elementary, we get an Irene who is closest to this trope of the woman
as love interest. She is the love of that Sherlock’s life, a woman whom he supposes to be

11
dead; her supposed death, however, is crucial in the shaping of Sherlock as a figure. Not
only that, but she defies the trope in her own way by also being Sherlock’s greatest
nemesis, Moriarty. Doyle’s original figure represents a new kind of woman, an adventuress,
who does not have a specific place carved out in society. Thus, subsequent adaptations see
Adler pushing boundaries and engaging in social taboos, making her a new kind of woman
even today.
Finally, there is the villain.. One thing we have come to expect from any incarnation
of a villain is that they will clearly distinguish themselves from the hero. They are the
(inferior) evil and the hero is the (superior) good. Jane Eyre had her wicked aunt and Tom
Brown had the school bully, Flashman. But once again, Doyle’s creations defy this heroic
trope. In the original canon, Moriarty acts as a kind of “double” for Holmes while also
representing the kind of man Holmes could easily be. On Sherlock the similarities between
Sherlock and Moriarty are much more acknowledged and clear; and, an already darker
Sherlock means that his connections to the master criminal are even more apparent.
Elementary may have a female Moriarty but she mirrors Sherlock every bit as much. All
incarnations of Moriarty are uncomfortably similar to the character of Sherlock Holmes.
And, like Holmes, Doyle’s Moriarty is a man who does not seek glory and whose criminal
deeds are not confined to one particular location or time.
We have seen many adaptations of Doyle’s characters since he created them and we
will most likely see many more. What separates Sherlock Holmes from the other literary
creations of his time is that he is a modern man, in any age. He is a man who looks to the
future and establishes a new precedent for a kind of hero – an intellectual hero. The fact
that he is not merely a product of the Victorian era means that we can move him around

12
and see how his crime-solving methods would work under all kinds of circumstances. But
wherever we bring Sherlock Holmes, it is almost certain that John, Irene, and Moriarty will
follow. They, too, represent new ways of looking at existing heroic tropes. Not only that, but
they are people without ties, people who would not be missed if they were to be plucked
out of the 1800s and placed down within the twenty-first century.

13

Chapter One
The Case of the Sidekick:
In Which John Watson Proves to be Holmes’ Perfect Match
and a Hero in His Own Right

“Explain what you have been to me and what I believe you can be to me. Partner.”
(Elementary “Details”)

In “The short story from Poe to Chesterton8,” Martin A. Kayman mentions the
success of various so-called “scientific detectives” in fiction. He notes the success of one
detective is far above the others: Sherlock Holmes. Kayman wonders what makes Holmes
so much more enduring and popular than other figures of his genre. The answer he arrives
at is Doctor John H. Watson. He writes that, “we are cushioned from potentially alienating
characteristics by Watson, who mediates our attitudes to the hero” (Kayman 49). Kayman
makes an excellent point: to get anywhere close to Sherlock Holmes, people must go
through Watson. This is found in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s stories, where Watson is the
narrator. It is found in the BBC’s Sherlock, where Watson is the only friend the consulting
detective really has, and the one person who makes him human. It is even found in CBS’s
Elementary, where a female Watson proves to be the best student Sherlock Holmes could
ask for. Over and over again this relationship between Holmes and Watson is discussed or
re-imagined. Considering the fact that the famous detective is not known for being a
“people person,” it is surprising that he is able to maintain a relationship with someone like
Watson. The reason behind the endurance of this relationship comes from the fact that,

8

Found in The Cambridge Companion to Crime Fiction

14
ultimately, the two figures are true partners. Here, the word “partner” is used to describe
two people who not only bring their own good qualities to the table but who also bring out
the best qualities in their accomplice. This concept of partnership is evident within Doyle’s
canon. There are, however, other ways to describe the relationship between these two
men. Throughout the canon and subsequent adaptations, readers and viewers find terms
such as “hero and sidekick”, “lovers”, and “sober companion” used to refer to the pairing.
Regardless of the terminology, two things remain absolutely clear: Watson is no sidekick
and Doyle’s original character is recognizable in modern adaptation. The first is because
Watson is clearly on Holmes’ level and the second is because the core qualities of Watson
are always found.

Doyle’s Canon9 - “Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes”10
Just as the Fates intervened in the lives of heroes in the ancient Greek stories, the
case could be made that similar entities brought Sherlock Holmes and John Watson
together in Doyle’s first novel A Study in Scarlet (1887). Having recently returned from
battle “with [his] health irretrievably ruined” (Doyle The Complete Sherlock Holmes Volume
I (CSH) 15), Watson encounters an old medical school acquaintance, Stamford. Upon
learning that Watson is searching for cheap lodgings and a flat mate, Stamford responds,
“That’s a strange thing. You are the second man to-day that has used that expression to me”
(Doyle CSH 16). When Watson asks after the identity of the first, the wheels are set in

9

When dealing with Doyle’s canon, it is important to remember that a large number of
articles are written by so-called “Sherlockians” who present a skewed and not often
verifiable viewpoint.
10 A Study in Scarlet

15
motion for Holmes and Watson to meet. Thus, the two men are brought together, seemingly
by some manipulative force, as if the two were meant to become partners.
From the moment they meet, it seems improbable that the two men will work out as
flat mates. When Watson and Stamford first enter the lab to meet Sherlock Holmes, the man
in question has just completed a chemical discovery.
At the sound of our steps he glanced round and sprang to his feet with a cry of
pleasure. “I’ve found it! I’ve found it,” he shouted to my companion, running towards
us with a test-tube in his hand. “I have found a re-agent which is precipitated by
hæmoglobin, and by nothing else.” Had he discovered a gold mine, greater delight
could not have shown upon his features. (Doyle CSH 17)
This first meeting between Holmes and Watson begins with the former showing immense
delight at his new discovery. What is truly interesting is that this outburst is not taken
badly by Watson, who had recently said, “If I am to lodge with anyone, I should prefer a
man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strong enough yet to stand much noise or
excitement” (Doyle CSH 16-17). Holmes may have studious habits but he is not lacking in
excitement, and yet this does not deter John. From the beginning, these men seem to be at
odds with one another. Watson is searching for a quiet, easy person with whom to live, and
Holmes is ready to jump for joy at the smallest scientific discovery. It is almost as if Watson
understands that this other man’s company will be beneficial to him, and as such, he is
willing to overlook his excitable nature.
Before the narrative A Study in Scarlet, even begins, the reader knows something
about the narrator, John H. Watson. In a practice seen during the Victorian era11, Sir Arthur

11

For example, H. Rider Haggard’s She.

16
Conan Doyle chose to present his stories about Sherlock Holmes as factual writings, in
particular, as the transcripts of the consulting detective’s partner in crime(solving). In the
case of this premier novel, the heading reads, “Being a reprint from the reminiscences of
John H. Watson, M.D., Late of the army medical department” (Doyle CSH 15). After
graduating with his medical degree, Watson enlists in the Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers.
It is not long before he finds himself outside of his home country, in a war zone. He tells the
reader: “On landing in Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes,
and was already deep in the enemy’s country. I followed, however, with many other officers
who were in the same situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar in safety,
where I found my regiment, and at once entered upon my new duties” (Doyle CSH 15).
Watson was not only part of the army, but he also showed bravery by going through
dangerous territory to reach his troops. His job is so important that it precedes the actual
narrative, taking up the first page.
Watson’s medical expertise is a quality found in most adaptations of the character.
In the canon, his medical abilities prove useful throughout the stories, as he is often called
upon to examine suspects, clients, and the bodies at crime scenes. In A Study in Scarlet, he
even diagnoses the murderer with an aortic aneurism12. In The Sign of Four, Watson’s
profession proves particularly useful to Holmes. When left alone with the body of
Bartholomew Sholto Holmes says to Watson, “just put [your] hand here on this poor
fellow’s arm, and here on his leg”. Watson observes the hardness of the muscles, leading
him to conclude that the man was killed with “some powerful vegetable alkaloid. Some
strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus” (Doyle CSH 112-113). Now, as we

12

To Jefferson Hope: “’Why,’ I cried, ‘you have an aortic aneurism!’” (Doyle CSH 77)

17
had learned in A Study in Scarlet, Holmes is a chemist, and probably already knew about the
alkaloid; but, getting a second opinion from a professional allows Holmes to be even more
sure, and also, gives him a chance to include Watson in the detecting business.
So we understand the importance of his medical career; but why does Watson have
to be an army doctor? Why can he not just be a county doctor? He cannot be a county
doctor because he would have too many ties. When Watson is sent back to England to
recuperate, he finds himself alone and without a purpose. He writes, “I had neither kith nor
kin in England…Under such circumstances I naturally gravitated to London, the great
cesspool into which all loungers and idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained” (Doyle
CSH 15). Watson is a stranger in his own land, and the injury and fever that leave him
unable to continue in service further distance him from the man he once was. Nowadays, he
most likely would be diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. Here, however, he
just becomes a “lounger and idler” – a man who used to be in the thick of the battle but who
must adjust to living a life of quiet relaxation. His reference to his time living at a hotel
provides further insight into how this change makes Watson feel, describing it as “leading a
comfortless, meaningless existence” (Doyle CSH 15-16). Distanced from people and from
his former self, it makes sense for such a man to jump at the opportunity to engage with
someone as intriguing as Holmes, even if he barely knows him. Watson’s medical
profession means he brings something important to his partnership with Holmes. The fact
that he is an army doctor without ties makes him utterly adaptable to new setting.
Although Watson is without roots or ties to society, he does reflect some
characteristic qualities of the era; as a professional, middle-class, and physically fit man, he
seems to be the typical Victorian male. In her essay “The Watson Effect: Civilizing the

18
Sociopath,” April Toadvine further explores the traits that make Watson appear to be a
conventional Victorian man. First, she mentions his sense of morality: “although he was
never a detective, he was certainly important because he represented the prevailing lateVictorian morality of the society in which he and Holmes lived (Toadvine 48). Watson’s
morality is more of what he brings to the table; he may not be a brilliant detective, but his
sense of right and wrong make him important to the partnership. His physical prowess and
bravery in battle also are qualities valued by Victorian society. Toadvine explains, “At the
time, a growing emphasis on athleticism, especially for young middle-class men, meant that
men were expected to be physical, athletic, and certainly courageous in the face of physical
danger” (Toadvine 49-50). Finally, the way he is referenced – by his last name and title –
indicates that he is meant to showcase middle-class Victorian behaviors (Toadvine 52).
While all of these qualities seem to add up to a man who represents his time, they are
inherent, internal and transportable qualities. Without any ties to the world around him
and with his defining characteristics being largely internal, Watson can be a brave and good
man in any time or place.
Just because Holmes and Watson are not figures necessarily defined by their setting,
does not mean that Doyle’s canon is completely without aspects that highlight Victorian
society. One such aspect is the fact it makes so much sense for these two men to live
together. While in today’s world it might seem logical to assume two men living together
are gay13, it was not nearly as uncommon in Holmes and Watson’s day. In her book,
Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick
introduces the idea of “homosociality”. She says that, “It is a word occasionally used in

13

Something the BBC series Sherlock greatly touches on.

19
history and the social sciences, where it describes social bonds between persons of the
same sex.” However, she is quick to add that, “it is a neologism, obviously formed by
analogy with ‘homosexual’, and just as obviously meant to be distinguished from
‘homosexual’” (Sedgwick 1). The idea of “homosociality” just has to do with people of the
same sex sharing a bond. Holmes and Watson are in a homosocial relationship because
there is no obvious romantic aspect to make it homosexual. So their living together did not
necessarily mean they were a couple at that time. In her thesis for Bridgewater State
University, Rebecca McLaughlin explores the changing nature of male domesticity in the
Victorian era. She writes, “as the empire expanded and technology advanced, the home
became less important, marriage less vital to a man’s identity, and a new emphasis on the
importance of homo-social bonds arose,” (McLaughlin 10). Marriage became less of a given
for men as the empire grew, but why? Part of the reason for this change perhaps had to do
with the fact that, with a growing empire, the concept of “home” was not nearly as concrete
as it had previously been. People would travel to the colonies in order to make names for
themselves. Those who were of lower status in England would be of high-class in the
countries where they were the white imperialists colonizing the country. Other people,
men specifically, found themselves in strange places fighting wars, like Watson did. When
people like this returned to the motherland, their place in society was in flux. With the idea
of home changing all around them, many Victorian men found themselves not concerned
with marriage and domesticity. What became important were the bonds men formed with
each other.
These bonds helped men further themselves professionally and helped them to
better other men in society. In his book A Man’s Place: Masculinity and the Middle-Class

20
Home in Victorian England, John Tosh writes about this trend of, what he calls a “flight from
domesticity”:
Among the professional and business classes who had lived by the code of
domesticity for two generations or more, there was evidence of growing
restlessness, amounting in some instances to outright rejection of marriage…For
them, domesticity no longer represented a fresh vision of comfort and reassurance,
but a straitjacket…its main drawback was the check it imposed on intimate relations
between men. (Tosh 172)
Perhaps this “restlessness” stemmed from a male desire for adventure out in the empire.
With a wife and family at home, there were tethers that would impede the exploring of a
growing world. However, just because Holmes and Watson seem to fit this mold of the men
fleeing domesticity, it must be remembered that Watson does get married. At the end of The
Sign of Four, he shares his plans to marry Miss Mary Morstan. And yet, her role as his wife
never interferes with his partnership with Holmes. Throughout the stories chronologically
after their marriage, Mary is only seen as an occasional opening to the narrative. In “The
Boscombe Valley Mystery,” she convinces Watson that helping Holmes with a case will be
good for him (Doyle CSH 202). In “The Five Orange Pips,” she is conveniently “on a visit to
her mother’s” (Doyle CSH 218). Her absence allows Watson to simply move back in with
Holmes and act as if they still shared a flat. As Mclaughlin also points out, “Dr. Watson also
shows very little interest in producing children to carry on his name,” (McLaughlin 12).
This decision not to have children could have to do with the fact that Watson is no longer a
young man when he marries. But it also could be viewed as a refusal to have something
that will tie him down and limit his ability to adventure with his friend. Though the trend of

21
men living with men certainly reflects the era in which Doyle was writing, Watson’s
conscious decision to not create more familial bonds makes him updatable. Since he has no
children to provide for, Watson is not defined by his medical practice or his family and he
can be a childless husband in any setting.
Unlike his flat mate, Sherlock Holmes does not clearly try to represent a typical
Victorian man, except in his flight from domesticity. Like Watson, his name is mentioned
before A Study in Scarlet begins14. However, unlike the professional description following
Watson’s name, Holmes only gets a “Mr.” before his. When Stamford describes Holmes to
Watson, the picture of the man does not really become any clearer. In fact, he becomes a
mass of contradictions. Stamford says, “I believe he is well up in anatomy, and he is a first
class chemist; but as far as I know, he has never taken out any systematical medical
classes.” He adds that, “his studies are very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a
lot of out-of-the-way knowledge, which would astonish his professors”. Finally, the reader
learns that this Holmes is “not a man that is easy to draw out, though he can be
communicative enough when the fancy seizes him” (Doyle CSH 16). In this very first
description of the focal point of these stories, the reader learns several things about
Holmes. He is not a student, but he studies medicine and chemistry frequently. He does not
go about his studies in a normal fashion, but he knows a great deal about many things. He
does not willingly talk much, but sometimes he wants to talk quite a bit. All of these
characteristics add up to a man who does not seem to fit into any specific category. This
unclassifiable quality of Holmes works in complement to Watson’s more stereotypically
Victorian characteristics.

14

His name is the title of the first chapter.

22
Their roles in the story, as typical Victorian and enigma, also dictate what they
determine to be valuable knowledge. Stamford is the one who first introduces the extent of
Holmes’ intelligence. Watson, though a physically able man, is also an educated one.
Knowledge is important to the both of them. However, the differing views these men have
about what constitutes important knowledge causes a bit of a scuffle. As Watson attempts
to figure out the true nature of his flat mate, he realizes that there are certain things that
the admittedly very intelligent man does not know.
His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary literature,
philosophy, and politics he appeared to know next to nothing. Upon my quoting
Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naïvest way who he might be and what he had
done. My surprise reached a climax, however, when I found incidentally that he was
ignorant of the Copernican Theory and of the composition of the Solar System. That
any civilized human being in this nineteenth century should not be aware that the
earth travelled round the sun appeared to me to be such an extraordinary fact that I
could hardly realize it. (Doyle CSH 21)
This passage clearly demonstrates what Watson considers to be important and necessary
knowledge. First of all, he values knowledge of all things contemporary. Knowing about the
popular literature of the time as well as knowing about the current political climate is
important to Watson because he believes it directly affects them as “human beings in the
nineteenth century.” Knowledge about the contemporary writer, Thomas Carlyle is deemed
equally important by Watson. Perhaps this and his ability to quote Carlyle stem from a
desire to be able to discuss important thinkers with his peers. Being able to quote a great
thinker demonstrates education as well as cultural awareness. Finally, the Solar System

23
and the Copernican Theory are important to Watson. These are both subjects which
children are taught. Therefore, the bulk of the population has known these details from a
very young age. The truth of the matter is that, though he is updatable because of his lack of
ties, Watson considers himself to be a product of the Victorian era, thus what is important
to them is important to him.
Holmes, on the other hand, views information and knowledge as important only as
long as it suits him in some purpose. After Watson confronts him about his lack of
knowledge about the Solar System, Holmes presents both his companion and the reader
with what has become a frequently looked-at view of the human mind. Holmes famously
compares his mind to an empty attic, waiting to be filled with knowledge. He tells Watson
that each man can choose what knowledge is worth placing in said attic and that fools will
try to fill it with everything. Holmes’ regards it as a foolish action because it forces
important knowledge out of one’s mind. He explains that, “the skillful workman is very
careful indeed as to what he takes into his brain-attic. He will have nothing but the tools
which may help him in doing his work, but of these he has a large assortment, and all in the
most perfect order” (Doyle CSH 21). The problem, Holmes claims, is that there is a finite
amount of space and that “it is of the highest importance, therefore, not to have useless
facts elbowing out the useful ones” (Doyle CSH 21). He may ramble a bit in driving his point
home, but what Holmes is getting at with this comparison is crucial to the difference
between his way of thinking and Watson’s. For Watson, all knowledge is important simply
because it is knowledge. It is worth knowing, and since other people know it, you have
more in common with them. Holmes, on the other hand, would highly disagree with the A.E.
Housman quote, “All knowledge is precious whether or not it serves the slightest human

24
use.” Sherlock Holmes believes that the only knowledge worth having is that which will
prove useful for a man in his work. Any other knowledge not useful on a daily basis, such as
the fact that the earth revolves around the sun, simply gets in the way of useful knowledge.
Just because something is a well-known fact does not mean that it is actually useful for
anyone in his or her day-to-day lives. One major difference between these two men is that
Watson values information that is known by the majority while Holmes values information
only so far as its utility to him. It demonstrates Watson’s concern with others versus
Holmes’ concern only with himself and his work. But this difference also highlights the fact
that they complete one another. Caring too much about what other people know and think
is not good and neither is only caring about oneself. Watson brings a world-view to table
while Holmes teaches him about how to prioritize important information.
Holmes and Watson differ in yet another major area: their responses to emotion and
love. When the two men meet Miss Mary Morstan for the first time in The Sign of Four,
Watson is immediately smitten with the woman. When she leaves 221B Baker Street,
Watson turns to Holmes and exclaims, “What a very attractive woman!” (Doyle CSH 96).
When Holmes confesses that he “did not observe,” Watson becomes rather aggressive. He
responds by saying, “you really are an automaton – a calculating machine. There is
something positively inhuman about you at times”(Doyle CSH 96). To Watson, being able to
appreciate the beauty of a woman is a basic trait of humanity. His objection does not
include questioning Holmes’ masculinity. Instead, he claims that by not observing Mary’s
beauty, Holmes is not a human at all. Holmes, as always, has a retort that explains why
something that is so important to other people does not matter to him. He informs Watson
“gently” that, “it is of the first importance…not to allow your judgment to be biased by

25
personal qualities. A client is to me a mere unit, a factor in a problem. The emotional
qualities are antagonistic to clear reasoning” (Doyle CSH 96). Once again, Holmes attempts
to explain to Watson, and the reader, that things that get in the way of clear, cool reasoning
are not worth your while. Knowing about the Solar System and being able to acknowledge
the beauty of a woman are not conducive to the functions of a detective’s mind. Similarly,
Watson once again asserts himself as the voice of the normal human in the flat. He
represents the average human race as a whole. He knows what is common knowledge, he
knows how to tell if a woman is pretty. He is the picture of a typical man and a typical man
for any generation. These fundamental differences between the two men seem as though
they would put a strain on their relationship. But once again, they prove complementary
rather than contradictory. Too much being distracted by women is not useful, nor is
completely ignoring human emotion. Holmes and Watson bring these two qualities
together and that makes them a perfect pairing.

“Everyone’s a Hero in Their Own Way”15
Though Holmes and Watson have their differences, they are one of the most famous
partnerships even today. But it does not always seem as though it is a partnership. More
often than not, there seems to be a belief that if Holmes is the hero of the stories, Watson
must be his sidekick. This title would imply that Watson is somehow lesser than Holmes.
One factor that seems to point to Watson as the subordinate in the relationship is the fact
that Holmes views him as a kind of biographer. In “A Scandal in Bohemia,” Watson attempts
to leave the flat when a potential client arrives. Holmes instructs him to “stay where you

15

Dr. Horrible’s Sing-Along Blog

26
are” because he would be “lost without [my] Boswell” (Doyle CSH 164). This is a reference
to James Boswell, a man who wrote a biography of the famous author, Samuel Johnson. This
comparison seems to show us how Holmes views Watson. In the beginning of his biography
of Johnson, Boswell explains to the reader what he is attempting to do. He writes:
To write the Life of him who excelled all mankind in writing the lives of others, and
who, whether we consider his extraordinary endowments, or his various works, has
been equaled by few in any age, is an arduous, and maybe reckoned in me a
presumptuous task. (Boswell 19)
In writing a biography of the apparently great Samuel Johnson, Boswell plans to sing
praises of the man. It is an homage to Johnson. When Holmes reads Watson’s narratives of
their adventures, he apparently views them as stories that highlight him as the main
character. He chastises Watson for “attempting to tinge it with romanticism” (Doyle CSH
90). As far as Holmes is concerned, Watson is his biographer and any attempts to make
these biographies more like stories takes away from the focus on Holmes’ brilliance. The
fact that Holmes is displeased by these stories hurts Watson because the latter says the
stories had “been specially designed to please him [Holmes]” (Doyle CSH 90). If Watson is
simply biographer to the great Holmes, he certainly seems to be set up as a kind of sidekick.
Another reason Watson is commonly viewed as subordinate is because of his
inability to mimic Holmes’ work. Even before Watson discovers what it is that Sherlock
Holmes does for a living, the reader finds him using the methods of the famous detective.
While attempting to make sense of why Holmes would value some information over more
commonly known things, Watson tries to categorize the man in question.

27
I pondered over our short conversation, however, and endeavoured to draw my
deductions from it. He said he would acquire no knowledge which did not bear upon
his object. Therefore all the knowledge which he possessed would be useful to him.
(Doyle CSH 21)
In a quest to discover what Holmes’ job is, Watson makes a list of the gaps in his
knowledge. He uses information he possesses to try to reach a conclusion about the man’s
work. Unfortunately, he does not see his deducing to the end. Instead, Watson reasons that,
“If I can only find out what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all these accomplishments,
and discovering a calling which needs them all…I may as well give up the attempt at once”
(Doyle CSH 22). Watson has the ability to reason like Sherlock Holmes, the ability to deduce
like Sherlock Holmes but he never reaches those same heights. Time and again, the reader
sees the same set-up - Holmes finds a clue and puts it to Watson to figure out the meaning
behind it:
“My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself …You know my methods. Apply them,
and it will be instructive to compare results” (Doyle CSH 112)
This passage elicits a response from Watson that is seen very often. Namely that he simply
does not know, “I cannot conceive of anything which will cover the facts” (Doyle CSH 112).
Frequently Watson just tells Holmes that he does not know the answer to the evidence
Holmes has provided. However, there are times where he attempts to follow in the
footprints of his companion.
“But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of our visitor’s stick? … Let me hear you
reconstruct the man by an examination of it” (Doyle CSH 669)

28
Watson begins to draw all sorts of conclusions about the owner of the stick, mainly
encouraged on by Holmes’ compliments of “Good!”, “Excellent!”, and “Perfectly sound!”
(Doyle CSH 669). However, Watson’s efforts yield absolutely nothing of importance.
Holmes’ desire to be truthful forces him to inform Watson that, “most of your conclusions
were erroneous” (Doyle CSH 670).
Holmes furthers the belief that Watson might be subordinate by talking down to him
in many instances. At one point, he informs Watson that “it may be that you are not
yourself luminous, but you are a conductor of light. Some people without possessing genius
have a remarkable power of stimulating it” (Doyle CSH 669). So, that is Watson’s role. While
not nearly as intelligent as Holmes, he provides the wrong answers which help Holmes find
the right ones. He is the “conductor of Holmes’ light”. While Holmes seems to mean this as a
compliment, it certainly comes across rather backhandedly.
But this is not the only reason Watson is generally considered to be inferior to his
companion. First of all, as previously noted, Holmes appears to be grooming him to be a
detective. This pedagogical relationship puts Watson in the position of student and Holmes
becomes the teacher. This would imply that Watson is on a lower level than Holmes.
Watson does his own fair share of perpetuating the belief that he is the subordinate in the
pairing. Throughout the canon, the reader sees Watson refer to many moments where he
admits to his obedience towards Holmes’ instructions. In The Sign of Four, when Holmes no
longer wants to continue explaining to Watson why emotion is a hindrance to reason, he
simply changes the subject. First he informs Watson that, when it comes to a beautiful
woman he “never makes exceptions. An exception disproves the rule.” Then Holmes diverts
the conversation by asking, “Have you ever had occasion to study character in handwriting?

29
What do you make of this fellow’s scribble?” And Watson just follows Holmes’ lead by
saying, “it is legible and regular” (Doyle CSH 96). Holmes has such control that he is able to
govern the way the conversation will go. Later in that scene he recommends a book to
Watson. Moments later, Watson is reading said book as though it is the most natural thing
in the world to do exactly as Holmes suggests. Not only does the reader see Holmes taking
control of conversations and giving instructions to Watson, we also see Watson admitting a
kind of loss when Holmes is not with him. When the pair separates in The Hound of the
Baskervilles, Watson spends most of his letters to Holmes –and even his diary entries –
wishing that Holmes would join him on the moor.
I prayed as I walked back along the grey, lonely road, that my friend might soon be
freed from his preoccupations and able to come down to take this heavy burden of
responsibility from my shoulders. (Doyle CSH 705)
Best of all would it be if you could come down to us. (Doyle CSH 726)
I wish that he were here. (Doyle CSH 730)
Holmes had missed him in London. It would indeed be a triumph for me if I could
run him to earth where my master had failed. (Doyle CSH 736)
Without Holmes, Watson feels useless. He believes that the case cannot be solved unless
Holmes is there to do so. The mere fact that he refers to Holmes as his “master” says
everything that anyone needs to know about the perceived dynamic in this pairing.
However, the reader – and perhaps even Watson himself – might be wrong in
reading the Holmes-Watson partnership as a dominant-subordinate relationship. Even as
he laments the fact that Holmes is not with him to solve the case, Watson is doing his own
detecting. In true Gothic fashion, Watson spies a mysterious figure while out on the moor

30
with Henry Baskerville. The figure looks as if he stepped out of the painting, The Wanderer
Above the Mists by Caspar David Friedrich. He stands as a shadow overlooking the moor.
Watson is immediately drawn to this man claiming that his “strange presence and
commanding attitude” had given Watson “a thrill” (Doyle CSH 726). He asks questions of
the locals to figure out the identity of the mysterious figure. Eventually he is led to the
name of a small boy who brings food to the stranger. Upon following the boy, he finds the
hideaway and, subsequently, the true identity of the man on the moor. It is Holmes himself,
conducting his own investigation in secret. Though Watson ends up following someone
unnecessary to the case, he still follows a lead to its conclusion. He also prides himself on
knowing the methods that Holmes uses. Watson does reason out conclusions about the
owner of the stick (Doyle CSH 669), even if they are the wrong conclusions. He has the
aptitude for crime-solving, he just seems to lack the confidence. In fact, when Watson
believes Holmes to be dead at the end of the “The Final Problem,” he is able to figure out
what it is that happened to his friend.
And then what had happened? Who was to tell us what had happened then?
I stood for a minute or two to collect myself, for I was dazed with the horror of the
thing. Then I began to think of Holmes’s own methods and to try to practise them in
reading this tragedy. It was, alas, only too easy to do. (Doyle CSH 479)
Watson’s first instinct, as usual, is to look for someone to answer the questions for him.
Since Sherlock Holmes is not there, he begins to reason out for himself what happened. And
what he comes up with makes complete sense. In fact, it would have been the only answer
available to readers had Doyle not resurrected Holmes. Watson has the abilities to think
like Holmes, but does not reach the right conclusions most of the time. However, this does

31
not make him inferior. It simply means that he has to be something else, something
complementary, so that Sherlock Holmes can be the brain. Whether they represent the
mind or the body, both men possess qualities that make them heroes.
It is rather ironic that Holmes did not know who Thomas Carlyle was16, for he seems
most similar to Carlyle’s definition of a hero. In his work, On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the
Heroic in History, Carlyle explains what he defines a hero as:
He is the living light-fountain, which it is good and pleasant to be near. The light
which enlightens, which has enlightened the darkness of the world: and this not as a
kindled lamp only, but rather as a natural luminary shining by the gift of
Heaven…(Carlyle 3-4)
There is that word again: luminary. When Holmes informs Watson that the latter is not
“luminous himself,” the implication is that the detective believes himself to be luminous.
According to Carlyle, one feature of the heroic figure is his natural light that he brings to the
world. With his knowledge and general enlightening of others, Holmes clearly matches
Carlyle’s ideal of the hero. Carlyle also writes that heroes are “the leaders of men, these
great ones” and that they are responsible for “all things we that we see standing
accomplished in the world” (Carlyle 3). In their essay entitled “’Don’t Make People into
Heroes, John’: (Re/De)Constructing the Detective as Hero” Francesca M. Marinaro and
Kayley Thomas refer to this notion. They write, “the Carlylian hero epitomized the strength,
ambition, and moral fortitude that the Victorians sought in their leaders during the golden
age of empire” (Marinaro and Thomas 65). They then use this definition to explain why
Holmes is a Carlylian hero. They refer to this hero as “the man who uses his skills and

16

CSH 21

32
talents to serve and to better mankind” (Marinaro and Thomas 65). This notion of the
thoughts of men and a leader being a hero definitely refer to Sherlock Holmes. However, as
discussed in the introduction, Holmes appears as a warped version of this “Great Man”
because he is not alone in what he does. He does the physical work of solving cases just as
much as he does the intellectual work. Holmes may seem similar to Carlyle’s “Great Man”
but the existence of Watson stops him from being an obvious example. Carlyle’s heroes do
not have partners, and they certainly do not have “sidekicks” to aid them in their greatness.
Which brings up the idea that Watson might just be another type of great man. He might
not fit Carlyle’s description, but neither does Holmes fully. In a way, it is the two of them
together that presents a more heroic figure.
From the very start of Doyle’s canon, Watson proves that he is a very physically
brave man when he details his dangerous trek to Kandahar with his troops (Doyle CSH 15).
Not only is he brave when the moment requires it, but Watson actively seeks out
excitement and peril. When he first meets Holmes, the thing that draws him to the man is
his very enigmatic nature. After Holmes manages to deduce Watson’s recent whereabouts,
Watson questions Stamford about how the man did it. When Stamford informs him that
many people would like that same answer, Watson is thrilled. He replies, “Oh! a mystery is
it?” He rubs his hands and says, “this is very piquant” (Doyle CSH 19). Setting aside the fact
that the rubbing of the hands will become a mannerism greatly associated with Holmes
throughout the canon, this is the reader’s first clue that Watson does not actually desire a
quiet and relaxing existence. He craves the thrill of danger, just like Holmes. In “The
Adventure of the Empty House”, after Holmes has revealed how he managed to survive his
encounter with Moriarty, he and Watson find themselves in a familiar tableau. For Watson,

33
the scene is familiar and welcoming. He writes that, “it was indeed like old times when, at
that hour, I found myself seated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket, and the
thrill of adventure in my heart” (Doyle CSH 488). Watson feels comfortable with this “thrill
of adventure”. He is not just some buffoon who follows the brilliant Sherlock Holmes
around. He is a great being in his own right. That kind of thrill and bravery does not exist in
every man.
Watson’s loyalty and strong moral character likewise establish him as a hero. In
“The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton”, Holmes discusses breaking into the titular
blackmailer’s house. Watson informs him that he “[doesn’t] like it, but I suppose it must
be.” Then he wonders when they will get started. When Holmes tells Watson that Watson
will not be coming along, the good doctor pulls out the big guns. He tells Holmes, “then you
are not going. I give you my word of honour – and I never broke it in my life – that I will
take a cab straight to the police-station and give you away, unless you let me share this
adventure with you” (Doyle CSH 576). First, Watson reminds the reader that he is, first and
foremost a man of honor. Watson’s strict position as an honorable person is a point of pride
with him. That being said, he turns the idea of honor on its head by swearing on his
honorable life that he will turn Holmes in if Holmes will not let him break into the house as
well. Here, Watson establishes that above all, he is loyal to Sherlock Holmes. He will not let
Holmes enter a potentially dangerous situation without him by his side. His bravery and
quest for adventure lead him straight into “battle” with his partner. Watson may not always
arrive at the right intellectual conclusions, but he is not lacking in the heroics department.
At the end of the day, it is not about who is smarter or more dominant or braver or
more physically adept. Holmes and Watson have a genuine friendship. One need look no

34
further than Watson’s final lines when he thinks his friend has died and he refers to him as
“the best and the wisest man I ever knew” (Doyle CSH 480). These men are, above all else, a
partnership. It may start out as a partnership of convenience between flat mates, but there
is more to it. Simply put, the men go together. Where one finds Holmes, one finds Watson. It
is evident throughout the canon. In “A Scandal in Bohemia”, Watson attempts to leave the
room when a client shows up. Holmes “caught [me] by the wrist and pushed [me] back into
[my] chair” before informing the client that, “it is both or none.” He tells the man that
anything he wants to say the detective, he can say to Watson (Doyle CSH 164). Holmes
actively keeps Watson from leaving because he knows that he needs him there. This may
just be so that Watson can provide more wrong answers to inspire correct ones. However,
it seems more as if Holmes is almost considering Watson a continuation of himself. It is
“both or none.” The men work best together; where Holmes goes, Watson does as well.
Because, after all, where would Holmes be without his narrator? And yet, it is important to
remember that though they may be “the same person” they are not interchangeable. Left
alone on the moor, Watson is not able to just do Holmes’ work. They need each other. They
make each other better at what they do, and that is why they are partners, as opposed to a
hero and his sidekick.

The BBC’s Sherlock and the Question of Homosexuality
On July 25th, 2010 the first episode of the BBC series, Sherlock, premiered. Starring
Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman as Sherlock and John respectively, it was aptly
titled “A Study in Pink”. This series saw the characters located, still in London, but in the
London of the twenty-first century. Written by Steven Moffat, this episode showed the

35
initial meeting between the famed pair. True to the roots of the stories Moffat and cocreator Mark Gatiss were so fond of, Holmes and Watson once again meet in a hospital after
John has happened to run into Mike Stamford, former medical school friend. Upon seeing
these figures relocated to the present day, it becomes clear that the qualities that define
them are relevant in any setting. They are still Holmes and Watson, but there is something
different about their dynamic Once again, they seem to be on a level playing field, but the
relationship has a rougher tendency. Here, as in the canon, the characters of Sherlock and
John represent a partnership with each man bettering the other. However, this one is more
about a partnership of humanity than of crime-solving. And although this adaptation is
fairly recent, is has inspired several collections of essays on themes ranging from sexuality
to autism.
For one thing, this adaptation addresses the question of a homosexual bond
between the men rather than a homosocial bond. As previously discussed, the fact that two
single men were living together in the Victorian era was not something out of the ordinary.
In today’s culture this sort of arrangement raises some questions though. Were they fresh
out of college, the public would most likely assume that they were just friends living
together to save on rent. However, their age and the fact they are established as
professionals17 means that the consensus is that they must be together. Whenever this
assumption is made, and that is frequently, John denies it - loudly and often. When John
gets his first look at their new flat, he also meets the landlady, Mrs. Hudson. She politely
informs them that, “there’s another bedroom upstairs, if you’ll be needing two bedrooms.”
To which John replies, “of course we’ll be needing two” (“A Study in Pink” 14:23-14:28).

17

As a consulting detective and a retired soldier maybe, but they are still adults with jobs.

36
Mrs. Hudson is not trying to insult the men, it is just that she knows another gay couple so
she naturally assumes that the two men moving in together are, in fact, together. She may
be the first to vocalize this belief but she is not the last by a long shot. Even in that same
episode, the men find themselves on a sort of stake-out at a restaurant. The waiter, an
acquaintance of Sherlock’s, first refers to John as Sherlock’s “date”. Then he offers to bring
“a candle for the table” to make it “more romantic”. Both times, John quickly asserts his
position by saying, “I’m not his date” (“A Study in Pink” 49:30-49:53). It becomes an almost
reflex for John to remind everyone around him that he is not Sherlock’s significant other.
One particular time the assumption of their sexuality is different is with Irene Adler. When
John confronts her after she fakes her own death, the two get into a conversation. She
makes a comment about his relationship with Sherlock and the following interaction takes
place:
John: We’re not a couple.
Irene: Yes you are.
John: Who-who the hell knows about Sherlock Holmes. But for the record if anyone
out there still cares, I’m not actually gay. (“A Scandal in Belgravia” 55:07-55:24)
Irene does not simply assume the men are together, she is as adamant as John. There is no
question here. She is telling John that he and Sherlock are a couple. Perhaps she does not
mean romantically but she is getting at the larger point of the fact that they are linked. But
the question arises: If John Watson is so adamantly heterosexual, why do audiences insist
on assuming there is some sort of homosexual tension between the two men?
The answer most likely is Sherlock himself. Sure, viewers of the show and readers of
Doyle’s stories can draw all sorts of conclusions that tell us Sherlock Holmes is in love with

37
Irene Adler. However, there is really no proof. At his core, this is a man who believes that
love is a hindrance to the reason of a good mind. So the result is that he is also a man who
never talks about his own sexuality. In “A Study in Pink”, the audience sees the two flat
mates out for the aforementioned dinner. The talk turns to that of relationships, with John
trying to get some information about his strange companion.
John: You don’t have a girlfriend, then?
Sherlock: Girlfriend? No, not really my area.
John: Mmm. Oh, right. Do you have a boyfriend? Which is fine, by the way.
Sherlock: I know it’s fine.
John: So you’ve got a boyfriend then?
Sherlock: No.
John: Right, OK. You’re unattached. Like me. Fine. Good.
Sherlock: John, um…I think you should know I consider myself married to my work,
and while I’m flattered, I’m really not looking for anyJohn: No, I’m…not asking. No, I’m just saying, it’s all fine.
Sherlock: Good. Thank you. (“A Study in Pink” 50:30-)
First of all, this interaction stems from a canonically Watson-like tendency to try and make
Holmes more normal. This comes after John tries to explain that “normal” people do not
have arch-enemies18, they have friends and significant others. The next piece to note is that
John assumes Sherlock must be gay when he says that girlfriends are not his area. For John,
that is the only other option. Sherlock then assumes that John must be gay because he is
asking these questions. Instead, John just wants information and Sherlock just does not
18

Which is how Mycroft Holmes first describes himself to John. Sherlock does nothing to
correct the misapprehension.

38
think about such things at all. The thing is, by not thinking about such things, Sherlock
allows his sexuality to be questioned at every turn. In her article, “The Noble Bachelor and
the Crooked Man: Subtext and Sexuality in the BBC’s Sherlock,” Carlen Lavigne discusses
this ambiguous exchange.
Holmes is “married to [his] work,” we are to understand, and according to the
writers on the commentary track, we should take this disavowal of romance as an
indication of the detectives’ definitive asexuality. On a subtextual level, however,
Holmes’ ambiguous response leaves the character suspended within a realm of
permanent possibility…(Lavigne 18)
The writers of this series (Moffat and Gatiss) may assume that they are portraying an
asexual character. However, the fact that Sherlock neither confirms nor denies anything
about his sexual orientation leaves the question of it up to the audience. Moffat himself has
been quoted as saying, “[Holmes] is not interested in [sex] at all. He’s interested in what his
brain is doing…the fact is, people say he shows no interest in women, therefore he must be
gay. He shows no interest in men, either. That’s just not what he does” (Lavigne 15). But
even if Sherlock himself is not interested in sex, he is still viewed in a sexual manner.
Constantly, women are trying to flirt with him. Most notably, hospital worker Molly Hooper
clearly has a hopeless crush. He may be without his own sexual orientation but he is not
without any sexual aspects. But as an audience, we are to assume his asexuality based on
the way he is presented. While a lot of the speculation about the nature of Sherlock and
John’s relationship comes from the fact that they are single men living together in the
twenty-first century, there is more to it than that. Sherlock’s ambiguous nature raises many

39
questions, but it is the belief that people really should be attracted to men or women that
leads to him and John being labeled so often as gay.
Aside from the homosexual subtext that is found so often in this adaptation, there
are other factors that separate the BBC series from its source material. For starters, this
twenty-first century John Watson is a rougher John Watson. In this modern setting, the fact
that John is dealing with PTSD is not only clear to the viewer but it is made clear within the
first minute of the first episode. The very first shots seen by the audience are of the
violence of the battlefield. Gunfire and explosions ring out (“A Study in Pink” 0:00-0:33).
Rather than just letting John tell the viewer what it was he went through, the director
chooses to show it through dreams and flashbacks of his. This establishes John’s character
as one who comes from a recent violent past. After he wakes up, the viewer sees John open
a desk drawer and reveal a service pistol (“A Study in Pink” 1:20). That pistol is the first
clue towards the fact that he is not the quiet-living, relaxed man he might like to be. Also, it
becomes clear that John has not been able to totally leave the war behind. When John talks
to his therapist, she tells him to write a blog about everything that happens to him. His
response of, “Nothing happens to me,” shows how ready he is to meet Sherlock Holmes and
to go on adventures once again (“A Study in Pink” 2:05).
John’s roughness is shown throughout the show. In the very first episode, the
audience sees John shouting at Mrs. Hudson, his new landlady. She offers to get him tea,
allowing him to rest his injured19leg. John responds by shouting, “Damn my leg! Sorry- I’m
so sorry” (“A Study in Pink” 16:30). This sort of outburst is never found in Doyle’s Watson.
Sherlock’s John always seems to have all of his emotions right at the surface. Physically,

19

Or at least limping leg.

40
John is more violent in this incarnation as well. In the first three seasons alone, the
audience sees John shoot a man20(“A Study in Pink”), grab onto a man to physically restrain
him (“The Great Game”), and beat up Sherlock (“A Scandal in Belgravia”). Though the last is
at the request of Sherlock, it goes above and beyond what the detective had in mind. This
constant physical assertiveness is not dissimilar to the Watson of Doyle’s canon. If one
assumes Sherlock Holmes to be the brains of the operation, John Watson becomes the
brawn. His profession as a doctor also aids itself to his physical prowess. That being said,
the John Watson of the BBC series is not just a physically brave man, but also one who can
sometimes get carried away in his violence. At the end of the first season, Moriarty uses
puzzles and games to lure Sherlock closer and closer to him. The final showdown between
them takes place in the empty pool of a school. While there, John – who has a bomb
strapped to him – grabs Moriarty from behind in order to distract him long enough to let
Sherlock escape (“The Great Game”). This is a brave man. The flip side of that is when
Sherlock asks John to punch him in the face so that he can seem more pitiable to Irene
Adler. When John does not answer at first, Sherlock asks if he heard him. John responds, “I
always hear ‘Punch me in the face’ when you’re speaking but usually it’s subtext” (“A
Scandal in Belgravia” 22:48-22:50). Sherlock punches him in the face to get him going and
eventually John has the larger man in a headlock. When Sherlock questions him, John
reminds him he was soldier. Sherlock, in turn, reminds him he was a doctor, to which John
replies, “I had bad days” (“A Scandal in Belgravia” 23:11). This is a man who will use any
means necessary – including sacrificing himself – to save the man with whom he is closest
at one moment, and then beat that same man up the next. This adaptation takes any

20

To be fair, a not very nice man…

41
lingering anger and violence that might have been repressed in Doyle’s Watson and brings
them to the forefront. Watson of the canon may have sometimes considered hitting Holmes
in the face, but he never would have. Sherlock’s John is never shy about vocalizing or even
physicalizing his complaints against the detective.
In addition to being a rougher person physically, the BBC’s John also has a rougher
relationship with Sherlock in general. The pair frequently argue with one another, or, more
accurately, John yells at Sherlock and Sherlock either takes it or calmly explains why John is
wrong. For example, the detective finds himself up against his greatest opponent, Moriarty,
and playing a sort of game with the criminal. If he solves the case, Moriarty’s hostage – with
a bomb strapped to them - will live. Unfortunately, one of the women makes the mistake of
starting to describe her attacker. When she is killed, Sherlock cannot help but point out that
he did technically solve the case. Whether this is a coping mechanism with the loss of a
human life or just a man trying to prioritize the case over the person, John decides that
Sherlock is being heartless.
John: There are lives at stake, Sherlock, actual human lives! Just so I know: do you
care about that at all?
Sherlock: Will caring about them help save them?
John: No.
Sherlock: Then I will continue not to make that mistake….I’ve disappointed you.
John: That’s good. That’s a good deduction, yeah. (“The Great Game” 50:06-50:34)
Just like Doyle’s Holmes and Watson had their disagreements about Watson’s documenting
their stories, Sherlock’s John finds the most annoyance in trying to explain basic human

42
emotions to Sherlock21. In this interaction, it actually upsets John how detached Sherlock is
being from these cases. Sherlock makes a valid point about the difference between caring
and trying to help. For John, this is unfathomable. For Sherlock, it is the way the world
works. This desire to make Sherlock more human is a common theme in their relationship.
In the last episode of the second season, “The Reichenbach Fall”, John pulls out a quote that
is familiar to Doyle readers. When Sherlock appears to not22 care about Mrs. Hudson being
shot, John calls him a “machine”. Like the “automaton” of Doyle’s novel, this is just another
way for John to imply that Sherlock is not human. It is this insult that resonates with the
doctor as he stands at Sherlock’s grave at the end of the episode. When John makes his
heartfelt speech about how Sherlock was the “wisest and best man” he ever knew he is
directly referencing the final lines of Doyle’s “The Final Problem”. However here he throws
in the phrase, “you were the best man and the most human-human being that I’ve ever
known”(“The Reichenbach Fall” 1:26:15-1:26:18). This speech is an apology. When Doyle’s
Watson is writing genuinely how he regarded the great Sherlock Holmes, it does not come
as an apology. There was a genuine friendship there. In the BBC series, John has to atone
for all of the times he implied that Sherlock was less than human. Their relationship is not
as smooth as that of the canonical men, but it still endures because once again John Watson
completes Sherlock Holmes in some way.
Part of the reason the BBC pairing works and lasts despite constant bickering and
disagreements is the fact that these men need each other. At the start of the series, John is a
man to whom nothing happens, and Sherlock is a man who, though very talented, is

21

Though that is not to say that this Sherlock likes having John blog about their adventures.
In fact, he finds it completely unnecessary.
22 Most likely because he knows it is a ruse to get John away from the hospital.

43
frequently mocked by his peers. When John finds out how Sherlock knew so much about
him at their first meeting, he is amazed.
John: That was… amazing.
Sherlock: You think so?
John: Of course it was. It was extraordinary. It was quite extraordinary.
Sherlock: That’s not what people normally say.
John: What do people normally say?
Sherlock: “Piss off”…(“A Study in Pink” 20:46-21:00)
During the pause before John says “amazing”, Sherlock is clearly waiting for the insult that
is forthcoming. When the men arrive at a crime scene, Sally Donovan lets Inspector
Lestrade know that the “freak’s here” (“A Study in Pink” 22:10). Sherlock is so used to
people regarding him as annoying or as a “freak” that to have someone genuinely in awe of
his talents is of the utmost importance. John saves him from a world full of people
ridiculing him. Similarly, Sherlock saves John from being so alone23. These men need each
other. They may seem like they are alone in the world and that “alone is what protects
[them]”, but in actuality they are so deeply connected and indebted to each other that the
other person is the most important to them (“The Reichenbach Fall”).
Though they need each other, in this incarnation there is little to no question of John
becoming a detective in his own right. Where Doyle’s Holmes always seemed to be
grooming Watson to learn his trade, this Sherlock only does so occasionally. This series is
more focused on the relationship of the men and their individual characters than on them
as a crime-fighting team. However, this does not stop people from assuming that there is a

23

Another fact John mentions in his graveside speech.

44
dominant and a subordinate in this relationship. Sherlock frequently makes comments
about the fact that John’s “normal” mind is much simpler than his own. Moriarty essentially
refers to John as a “pet” of Sherlock’s. In “The Reichenbach Fall”, Moriarty says “Aren’t
ordinary people adorable? Oh, you know. You’ve got John. I should get a live-in one” (25:1625:25). The general belief of people on the show is that John is somehow less than Sherlock
because he is not as massively intelligent. But once again, these are men who complete each
other. One of these men is not lesser than the other. They feed into each other’s
personalities and make each other better people.
At Sherlock’s grave, John mentions how the detective saved him from a life of
loneliness and boredom. Sherlock does this by becoming a constant presence in John’s life
that is not a therapist. But Sherlock also gives John the adventure and excitement he so
desperately seeks. Despite John’s early signs of PTSD, it becomes clear that he actually
misses the excitement of war. When John first witnesses Sherlock being called on a case,
the detective comes back for him.
Sherlock: Seen a lot of injuries then? Violent deaths?
John: Yes.
Sherlock: Bit of trouble too, I bet.
John: Of course, yes. Enough for a lifetime, far too much.
Sherlock: Want to see some more?
John: Oh God, yes. (“A Study in Pink” 17:00-17:25)
In front of anyone else, this admission may not have been so easy for John. What does it say
about a war veteran that he misses the violence and trouble of the battlefield? However,
Sherlock proves himself a similarly minded person. He is a person who gets excited over

45
the prospect of a serial killer. The fact that Sherlock allows John to admit, perhaps to
himself even, that he still wants to see carnage and danger establishes a connection
between the two men. When John finds himself unknowingly face to face with Sherlock’s
older brother, Mycroft, the latter also understands that John misses the war. He looks at
him and says, “You’re not haunted by the war, Dr. Watson – you miss it” (“A Study in Pink”
40:08-40:14). However, here John just continues staring. The connection that he has and
the comfort admitting this fact to Sherlock is not present with this other Holmes. Part of it
is that he has just been abducted by the man in question and believes him to be Sherlock’s
biggest enemy. But it also has to do with the fact that in Sherlock, he recognizes a kindred
spirit. Sherlock allows John to return to a life that society expects him not to want.
Then what does John give to Sherlock in this equation? If they are truly to be
regarded as partners, he must bring something to the table. So, what is it? The answer to
that lies in the issue of Sherlock as a hero. In Marinaro and Thomas’ article on
“(Re/De)Constructing the Detective as Hero”, they once again mention Thomas Carlyle’s
idea of a hero; this time in reference to the BBC series.
Thus what Conan Doyle identifies through the characters of Watson and Holmes and
what these adaptations further illustrate is the distinction between greatness and
goodness. The BBC series directly defines this distinction toward the conclusion of
the “A Study in Pink,” with Detective Inspector Lestrade (Rupert Graves) informing
John that, “Sherlock Holmes is a great man, and I think one day, if we are very, very
lucky, he might be a good one.” Lestrade does not preclude Sherlock from heroism in
indicating the absence of “good” in the detective’s character, but he does powerfully
remind in his evocation of the words “great” and “good” that there is more to

46
Carlyle’s Great Man than great talent or achievement: there must be goodness as
well. (Marinaro & Thomas 72)
Here, Marinaro and Thomas highlight the BBC’s attempts to distinguish between a “good”
man and a “great” man. Sherlock is a “great” man because of his brilliance and his talent.
However, his lack of empathy and seeming disinterest in others and their well-being makes
him not a “good” man. With Lestrade saying this to John, it almost appears to the viewer
that he is setting up a challenge for him. As an army doctor, John helped people. He
constantly tries to get Sherlock to worry about the safety of others and has no qualms
about calling him out on what is seen as heartlessness. Once again, John shows he
possesses qualities of a Carlylian hero. Carlyle writes:
One comfort is, that Great Men, taken up in any way are profitable company. We
cannot look, however imperfectly, upon a great man, without gaining something by
him. (Carlyle 3)
One of the qualities of a Carlylian hero is that they better those around them. As John tries
to make Sherlock into a “good” man, he demonstrates this quality. This kind of heroism
lends itself to the notion of these men as partners as well. While Sherlock proves his
greatness over and over again, John attempts to prove “profitable company” by making the
detective a “good” man.
And John does help Sherlock to become a “good” man. However, it is not by lecturing
him about care of others and empathy. It is simply by being. It is quickly established in the
series that if you want to hurt Sherlock, you go through John. When Moriarty wants to
finally come face to face with his “good guy” counterpart, he does so by kidnapping and
strapping a bomb to John (“The Great Game”). Similarly, when Moriarty wants Sherlock to

47
kill himself and be branded a fraud, he threatens John (“The Reichenbach Fall”). On the
other hand, the presence of John is also a saving grace for Sherlock. When he is close to
death in the third season after being shot, Sherlock goes through his “mind palace” and
receives advice from all of those people who are important to him: his brother, Molly
Hooper, and even Moriarty. But the thing that fully saves his life is a comment Moriarty
makes about “who’s going to save John Watson, now” (“His Last Vow”). What causes
Sherlock Holmes to wake himself up and survive a potentially fatal bullet wound is the
prospect of his best friend being in danger. Which leads to yet one more thing John does to
aid Sherlock: he becomes his friend. After a harrowing journey to Dewer’s Hollow in “The
Hounds of Baskerville”, the men get into one of their usual spats. This one involves
Sherlock informing John that he “doesn’t have friends,” something that hurts John and
makes him lash out a bit. The fact that Sherlock considers himself the type of man to have
arch-enemies but not friends makes John once again question the humanity of this man.
Later in the episode, Sherlock does something slightly out of character – he apologizes to
John. He does so by saying, “listen, what I said before, John, I meant it. I don’t have friends.
I’ve just got one” (“The Hounds of Baskerville” 52:43-52:50). John is Sherlock’s friend, and
that is not a term used very often by the detective – or ever, in fact.
So, John provides someone for Sherlock to worry about, someone to protect, and
someone to consider a friend. He is not some subordinate ordinary human following in the
shadow of the great detective. John is part of what makes Sherlock who he is. John Watson
is proof of Sherlock’s humanity. He disproves Sherlock’s own belief that he does not, in fact,
have a heart (“The Great Game”). As noted in the first season finale, Moriarty can see quite

48
clearly what Sherlock cannot, and that is that the detective does have a heart. Marinaro and
Thomas discuss this question of heart in their article.
To that end, in the final showdown in “The Great Game,” Moriarty’s men train their
sniper rifles upon Sherlock’s head and John’s heart, aligning the two men in their
respective roles of greatness and goodness: Sherlock, whose great mind has been
led here by its attraction to Moriarty’s, and John, the brave hostage willing to
sacrifice his life in order that Sherlock might escape. (Marinaro and Thomas 77)
In an allusion to the belief that these men represent two crucial parts of a hero – heart and
brains – Sherlock physically illustrates which man possesses which quality. When Moriarty
leaves the two men and Sherlock gets the bomb off of John, he acknowledges the fact that
John was willing to sacrifice himself. He informs him that “that thing [he] did…that was, um,
good” (“The Great Game”). It takes a lot for Sherlock Holmes to acknowledge great deeds by
others. However, he can tell what that meant and in that moment he realizes that he cares
for John and would do the same for him were the roles reversed. The show demonstrates
this realization when Moriarty returns: “Indeed, after Sherlock’s emotional display,
Moriarty returns, as do the snipers’ beams – notably trained now upon Sherlock’s heart”
(Marinaro & Thomas 78). In this one moment, the viewer is shown that John is responsible
for giving Sherlock a heart. His presence is not just as a friend, he is the figure who
humanizes the great detective. This humanization is yet another way of proving their roles
as partners. John betters Sherlock just as Sherlock does the same for John.
As with the Doyle canon, the BBC’s versions of Sherlock Holmes and John Watson
bring different qualities to the table. In the television adaptation, while there is no real
emphasis on a pedagogical relationship, these men definitely learn from each other and the

49
John of the BBC program is not subordinate to Sherlock just as Doyle’s Watson was not. In
the case of Martin Freeman’s John, he is the character that turns Benedict Cumberbatch’s
Sherlock into a true hero, a quality that demonstrates the very importance of Watson. Not
only that, but Freeman is also clearly Watson. His PTSD might manifest itself more angrily
and violently but his bravery, morality, and humanity all make the jump from nineteenth
century England to the present day just fine.

CBS’s Elementary and the Sober Companion
The United States has its own modern adaptation of Doyle’s iconic characters.
Premiering in September 2012, CBS’s Elementary sees Sherlock Holmes (played by Johnny
Lee Miller) living in New York City after spending time in rehab. Enter Doctor Joan Watson
(played by Lucy Liu), assigned to Holmes by his father to be his sober companion, she is
hired to live with Holmes and make sure he does not fall off the wagon. Immediately,
several aspects appear to differentiate this adaptation from others. First of all, the meeting
between these two characters is not the kismet of Doyle’s or the BBC’s. Joan does not
happen to run into an old classmate who introduces her to Sherlock. This relationship is
based upon a professional arrangement, a factor that heavily influences the way this
pairing ultimately relates to its predecessors or contemporaries. The other distinguishing
factor is that Watson is a woman.
Turning John Watson into Joan Watson was a decision which had the potential to
alter the entire way the relationship was viewed. If viewers are so determined to find a
sexual component to the Holmes/Watson relationship when they are both men, it must be
even easier if it is a heterosexual pairing. Yet, this decision is not unheard of. One particular

50
Baker Street Irregular and author has been arguing the true nature of Watson’s gender for
some time. Rex Stout, author of the Nero Wolfe series, shocked his fellow “Irregulars” when
he stood up at a meeting and announced that, “Watson was a woman.” This belief is
discussed in the book, fic: Why Fanfiction is Taking Over the World by Anne Jamison. In the
section entitled “The Early Adventures of the Apocryphal Sherlock Holmes”, Jamison
addresses Stout’s theories.
Stout…made waves with this close reading, finding abundant evidence in “The
Sacred Writings” of Watson’s female gender in her nagging Holmes about drugs and
smoking and pestering him to talk – and if that weren’t enough, “Imagine a man
asking another man to play him some of Mendelssohn’s Lieder on a violin!” (Jamison
45)
As far as Stout was concerned, it was obvious from Watson’s various traits that “she” was a
woman. What most readers presumably regarded as professional and friendly medical
concern turned into henpecking. Watson’s appreciation of Holmes’ violin playing, and the
fact that Watson actually requested songs, apparently added up to Watson, in fact, being a
woman. Today, viewers are preoccupied with whether there is homosexual subtext to the
Holmes and Watson relationship. If Watson is a woman, another important question
presents itself.
Initially, Stout worries whether the couple lives in sin: “It was unquestionably a
woman speaking of a man, yes, but whether a wife of a husband or a mistress of a
lover…I admit I blushed. I blushed for Sherlock Holmes and I closed the book.” He
assuages his worry about the morality of Doctor Watson’s and Sherlock Holmes’
intimacy by deducing that they are married with further observations drawn from

51
the text: Watson’s assertion that he is “the most long-suffering of the mortals” and
his complaint that he had become a “habit” to Holmes – “as an institution I was like
the violin, the shag tobacco, the old black pipe, the index books, and others perhaps
less excusable.” (Jamison 45)
The fact that Stout uses a word such as “unquestionably” is fascinating. He was most
definitely in the minority in his assumptions about Watson’s gender. Jamison herself
demonstrates this by using a male pronoun to describe Watson in this passage. For Stout to
assume that these comments and reactions could only be from a woman is positively
staggering. And it gets stranger. Jamison informs us that “in a quite dazzling anagrammatic
tour de force of cipher discovering and decoding,” Stout comes to the conclusion that
Doctor Watson is, in fact, Irene Watson. The sarcasm and slight derision is apparent in the
way Jamison describes this massive jump to a conclusion. Stout had decided that when
Holmes was involved with Irene Adler’s wedding in “A Scandal in Bohemia”, he was
actually the groom and that he was marrying Irene Watson. Today, it seems almost
laughable that one would assume Watson was a woman. Going from the time the stories
were written, when two men living together was not really that strange, to a time where
everyone who meets these two men assumes that they are gay, this is an interesting pit
stop. Stout does not seem to think that it would be wrong for two men to live together. He
just believes that it makes more sense for Watson’s character to be a woman. Jump to the
year 2012, and television viewers are able to see this idea realized. Of course, Elementary’s
Sherlock and Watson are far from married. At the present, there has been no romantic
tension between them, although Holmes’ asexuality is not assumed in this adaptation.
Watson’s gender is not the only thing that separates her from Doyle’s creation and even the

52
BBC’s incarnation. Although she is a doctor, she is not an army doctor but a surgeon, whose
PTSD stems from losing a patient on the table rather than images of a battlefield. After
having a patient die, this Watson has turned to the world of rehabilitation, working as a
sober companion with people who have just left rehab for drug addictions.
Perhaps it has to do with how recent this adaptation is, but there are essentially no
scholarly writings on this particular show. That being said, a lot can be told simply by
looking that the show itself and the way the characters are interpreted. The main focus of
this adaptation is on the way in which the Sherlock and Watson relationship changes and
grows throughout the series. The BBC series shows the two men being set up as flat mates.
They eventually grow to become good friends, best friends and also partners. The crimesolving is important there but it is more about their friendship. Doyle’s creations seem to
immediately hit it off as friends and while it is the crime-solving that keeps them together
once Watson gets married, the canon also focuses on their relationship. The BBC never
seems to focus on John becoming a detective and Doyle’s canon has Holmes seemingly
trying to groom Watson before realizing that it is ultimately hopeless. All of these aspects
are found in Elementary but the difference here is that the pedagogical aspect of the
relationship we see in the canon is not only present but ultimately yields results.
From the beginning of this relationship, the usual dynamic is switched on its head.
As Sherlock’s sober companion, Watson has quite a bit of control. She is able to enforce
rules and to make him check in with her after certain amounts of time. She provides a sort
of tether for the detective, a grounding factor. But the idea of Watson being a “sober
companion” is not at all new. While he was not hired to stop Holmes from using drugs,
Doyle’s Watson made his feelings about the usage very clear. When Watson watches

53
Holmes shoot up in The Sign of Four, he tells the reader, “from day to day I had become
more irritable at the sight, and my conscience swelled nightly at the thought that I had
lacked the courage to protest” (Doyle CSH 89). As a doctor, Watson views it as professional
responsibility to stop Holmes from using. However, since he is not Holmes’ doctor, his
opinion need not be heeded. He has the intention to be a sober companion but lacks the
authority to enforce it. On Elementary, Watson is hired to do that very thing: stop Sherlock
from using drugs. The power dynamic shifts when she is able to become the authority in
the house. In previous incarnations, Holmes has the power to dominate any situation, no
matter how professional or talented in his own right Watson is. In this case, Sherlock may
have the more noticeable personality but he answers to Watson. Not only that, but this
Watson – not unlike the BBC’s – very rarely puts up with nonsense from Sherlock. In the
first episode, after Sherlock makes a deduction that doesn’t impress Watson, she points out
that he has no mirrors in the apartment. She says, “it means I think you know a lost cause
when you see one” (“Pilot” 28:30). From right at the start, Watson has no qualms about
calling Sherlock out on his being a messed-up individual. Not only does she not mind saying
these things, she most likely views it as her responsibility as his sober companion not to
coddle his feelings.
While the canon and the BBC have the relationship between Holmes and Watson
begin as one of convenience, this one is imposed, a fact constantly mentioned in the show.
At the start, Sherlock asks what he should refer to Watson as so as to maintain the
confidentiality of her true profession, settling first on the moniker “glorified helper
monkey”(“Pilot” 6:54). Even if Watson is in charge of overseeing Sherlock’s well-being, the
latter still regards her as someone existing solely to aid him. In this way, Sherlock seems to

54
think that he is the dominant personality, despite Watson’s professional responsibility.
Sherlock demonstrates this belief by essentially using Watson as an inanimate object.
When Sherlock is trying to solve a case, Watson makes the mistake of trying to talk to him.
Sherlock: Situations like these, cases that require my total concentration, I talk to
you, never the other way around…I found over the years that nothing clears up a
case so much as stating it to another person. I talk, they listen, and in talking, I make
connections I may have otherwise missed. One-way street, not two. (“Child
Predator” 8:25 & 10:00-10:15)
In a clear reference to Doyle’s Holmes referring to Watson as a “great conductor of light”,
this incarnation of Sherlock is stating that Watson is really only useful as a sounding board.
Her purpose is to listen to him but never to respond. As she shows time and again, this
Watson is not one to take statements like these easily. When Sherlock tries to speak to her
a little later in the episode, she responds in an annoyed manner.
Watson: I’m sorry, were you talking to me? Because I thought I was just a cavernous
expanse between two ears. (“Child Predator” 11:56-11:58)
This Watson is not one who will take things lying down. She makes her feelings known, and
in doing so perhaps helps the detective become a more aware person.
Part of the difficulty in this relationship comes from the fact that they really did not
choose each other. Throughout the first half of the season, the viewer is reminded of the
fact that Sherlock and Watson are not a match made for the long run. At one point, Sherlock
even says that, “friendship is not a requirement of cohabitation” (“While You Were
Sleeping” 29:28). Considering Doyle’s characters referred to each other as friends almost
immediately, this is jarring. Like the BBC’s Watson, Elementary’s also frequently gets fed up

55
with aspects of Sherlock’s personality. During the fourth episode of the season, after
Sherlock deduces some amazing fact, Watson is unimpressed. She turns to him and asks,
“this is the part where I ask you how you knew that, right?” (“The Rat Race” 4:37). She
refuses to cater to his showing off. Rather than genuine curiosity at how Sherlock’s mind
works, she makes a snide comment about realizing her role as his adoring fan. This friction
between them is joined by the fact that the viewer is also constantly reminded that theirs is
an impermanent situation. Both of them know that the relationship will only continue as
long as Watson is hired to be Sherlock’s sober companion. However, when things get
particularly dicey, Watson offers to find Sherlock a new companion. This treatment of the
relationship as if it were a fleeting thing is completely new. Not even marriage kept Doyle’s
Watson away from Holmes and here we have the doctor suggesting maybe they should
separate.
As is perhaps unsurprising, when the time comes for them to part ways, Sherlock
suggests that Watson say she needs more time with him. In their short time together,
between the bickering, the detective realized potential in his companion. In the very first
episode, Watson does some detecting of her own and though she arrives at the wrong
conclusion, it is clear that she has a knack for it. Sherlock’s pride at this aptitude is evident
in another scene from the fourth episode.
Watson: I think maybe he lied to me. It was the end of the night and we were talking
about whether or not we’d been married and when he said he hadn’t – and this isn’t
something I would’ve noticed before I started working with you – but I could swear
he wasn’t telling the truth.

56
Sherlock: Flexing our deductive muscles, are we? I could burst with pride. (“The Rat
Race” 21:26-21:44)
This Watson seems to pick up talents and abilities from Holmes. This is not something we
see terribly often in the canon where Watson tries the methods and usually fails, or the BBC
where John rarely tries at all. This pairing goes from being a fleeting forced arrangement to
the relationship with the most professional potential. When Watson lies about Sherlock’s
father giving her the okay to stay on as his son’s companion, Sherlock begins a rigorous
training regiment with her. This includes a physical aspect. After an attack in the
apartment, Sherlock takes to randomly throwing objects at Watson to gauge her ability to
react.
Sherlock: Look, given that you were held at gunpoint in this room little over a week
ago, I thought, perhaps, a test of your ability to defend yourself was in order. It was.
You have much to learn about the art of self-preservation. (“Details” 0:47-0:58)
Watson is not thrilled by this newfound focus on making sure she can protect herself.
However, she begins to play along, even throwing things back at Sherlock sometimes.
Annoying as he may be, she seems genuinely eager to learn from him. In the episode
entitled “Dead Man’s Switch”, Sherlock asks Watson to see what she can tell about a man’s
handwriting. He wants to see what she learned from the reading he assigned to her. That is
correct, he assigned reading to his roommate. And she did it. Much like Doyle’s Watson, this
incarnation takes the advice of Sherlock Holmes frequently. However, here she makes
something of it. His lessons prepare her to becomes what she was destined to be all along –
his partner.

57
Like any other Holmes and Watson pairing, this one establishes the fact that Watson
is the “heart” of the team. At one point, Sherlock mentions that a case “has a moral
component. You’re good with that sort of thing” (“One Way to Get Off” 22:46). He
acknowledges Watson as the ethical, moral compass of the pair. But it is more than that, as
it always is. When the truth comes out that Watson is not longer being paid to be Sherlock’s
companion, Sherlock offers a counter arrangement. He informs Watson that he knew all
along she had been let go, but that he let her stay on and did not say anything. So, he
suggests something else.
Sherlock: Explain what you have been to me and what I believe you can be to me.
Partner…And lest you think this is an act of charity, a gift from a grateful client, let
me assure, it is not. I am better with you, Watson. I’m sharper, I’m more focused.
Difficult to say why, exactly. Perhaps, in time, I’ll solve that as well. (“Details” 28:3528:41 & 28:58-29:33).
It turns out that changing something as fundamental as Watson’s gender does not alter the
ultimate nature of this relationship. At the end of the day, Watson is Sherlock’s partner.
S/He is his equal as well as a person who makes Sherlock a better version of himself. In this
adaptation, she proves to be a detective in her own right, learning from the best. However,
she also helps to make the best even better than he was to begin with.
There are few names that go together more in the cultural mind than those of
Sherlock Holmes and John Watson. In Doyle’s canon, it was easy to interpret Watson as the
brilliant detective’s buffoonish sidekick. However, in reality, he was just as heroic as
Holmes. Together, they created one exceedingly strong hero with brilliance and bravery.
They were partners who bettered one another. Modern adaptations also illustrate this

58
notion of the two characters bettering each other. In the BBC’s Sherlock, viewers see a John
that turns Sherlock into a good man and a Sherlock who saves John from himself. On CBS’s
Elementary, the potential pedagogical relationship that most incarnations allude to is fully
realized, and the two become a crime-solving team to envy. And yet, though these
adaptations show new spins on the relationship, John Watson is always clearly John
Watson – or Joan. The qualities that define Doyle’s character, his bravery and morality, are
always there. We can tell it is Watson, because his internal character is consistent, even as
it adapts to fit the time. And Holmes’ relationship with Watson endures is because Watson
has something to offer to the great detective. He offers the potential for humanity as well as
heroism. Sherlock Holmes needs John Watson, and that is something that we will see over
and over again in all imaginings of the pair.

59

Chapter Two
The Adventure of the Woman:
In Which Irene Adler Endures Because
She is a Boundary Pushing, Modern Woman in Any Time or Place

“In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex”
(Doyle “A Scandal in Bohemia”)

“To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman” (Doyle Complete Sherlock Holmes
Volume I (CSH) 161). This is how the reader is first introduced to the character of Irene
Adler: not with a professional title like John Watson, M.D., but singled out as above the rest
of her sex. Before her name is even stated, Adler’s position as an important figure is
uniquely solidified within the Holmes canon. Considering that she appears only in the story
“A Scandal in Bohemia,” it might perhaps surprise readers that Adler endures as a
character even today, appearing in many of the modern adaptations. What is it that sets her
apart from any of the other one-off characters? Most broadly, it has to do with her besting
of the great Sherlock Holmes. One unchanging aspect of Irene’s character - from Doyle’s
original story to the modern television adaptations of today – is the fact that she manages
to wrangle the power in a situation away from Holmes himself. She does this by being a
woman who pushes the boundaries of whatever setting she is in. Doyle’s Adler is hardly a

60
typical Victorian woman. She is an adventuress. Sherlock’s Irene works as a dominatrix.
Elementary’s Irene is a beautiful art restorer who also happens to be an art forger. This
tendency to be more than what is expected makes Irene a character suited to any time or
place.

Doyle’s Adler – The Adventuress Outwitting the Automaton
“A Scandal in Bohemia” (1891) is the first short story within the Sherlock Holmes
canon, following the novels A Study in Scarlet and The Sign of Four. In this story, Holmes
and Watson are visited by a masked man who is revealed to be the King of Bohemia. He
comes to them seeking help before his upcoming nuptials. He tells the men that a woman
from his past, Irene Adler, possesses a photograph that he would prefer his betrothed
never see. Holmes promises to retrieve the photo from Miss Adler and, in so doing,
somehow finds himself a part of her wedding. After going to her town to scope out where
she lives, he sees a handsome man enter, then leave her house. Adler quickly follows, and
Holmes quickly follows her – right to a church. He appears just in time to act as a witness in
the marriage of Irene Adler and Godfrey Norton, lawyer. What follows is a game of cat and
mouse where the power dynamic between Holmes and Adler constantly changes. First,
Holmes disguises himself as a vicar in order to gain entry into her home when he feigns
injury in a staged fight. Once inside, he tricks Adler into showing him where she keeps the
photograph, with help from Watson and his perfectly timed call of “Fire!” Proud of himself
for outsmarting her, Holmes plans to return in the morning to steal the picture. Instead, he
finds a letter from Miss Adler, informing him that she figured out his plan and intends to
leave the country with her new husband. In the letter, she promises never to reveal the

61
photograph, and even sends a small picture of herself for the king to hold onto – a picture
that Holmes ends up keeping for himself.
Though the plot of this story may seem relatively simple, it has something that few
other stories in the Doyle canon have: a character that remains an integral part of the
Holmes universe. Irene Adler appears in this story only, but she is constantly associated
with Sherlock Holmes. The first step in figuring out what makes her endure as a figure is to
look at the woman herself. Aside from Watson’s opening statements about Adler – which
we will come to, never fear – the first description the reader gets of her is from the King. He
tells Holmes and Watson:
Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of
the well-known adventuress Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you.
(Doyle CSH 165).
The fact that the King assumes Holmes and Watson would know her name raises the
question of what it is she has done to make it a household one. According to the royal client,
she is known for being an “adventuress”. The term “adventuress” refers to “a woman who
enjoys or seeks adventure”. A secondary definition clarifies the term a bit more: “A woman
who seeks social or financial advancement by dishonest or unscrupulous methods”. So, the
connotation of this word is not a positive one. It is a term generally associated with a
woman who uses her sexuality to get ahead in the world. What stands out about the word
itself is that it is a feminization of a usually male-associated word. When one hears the term
“adventurer”, it brings to mind stories of men who go out into the empire. It makes us think
of novels such as Rider Haggard’s She and the mystical, exotic journey taken by the men in
it. In short, “adventure” is something for a man – and a positive thing, at that. When the

62
term is applied to a woman, however, it takes on a devious and dishonest tone. Why would
this be?
For starters, the notion of an “adventuress” was something that went against what
were deemed appropriate gender roles in the Victorian era. In a chapter from The New
Woman and Her Sisters: Feminism and Theatre, 1850-1914, entitled “The Adventuress: Lady
Audley’s Secret as novel, play, and film”, Zoe Aldrich provides readers with some
characteristics of the adventuress, via a quote from Jerome K. Jerome’s Stageland:
“She has grit and go in her. She is alive. She can do something to help herself besides
calling for “George” (Aldrich, quoting Jerome 160).
An adventuress is a woman who can survive on her own, a woman who thrives and is
passionate. Above all, she is a woman who can be self-sufficient and does not need a man to
get by – an unorthodox thought for the Victorian era. Aldrich also references a little verse
from a soap fan magazine:
These are a few of the man-ipulators,
Those women who control men and often make them look foolish.
Women who control their men.
Women who control all men.
Women we wish we could be more like. (Aldrich 160)
An adventuress takes hold of men. An adventuress is a figure women aspire to be. Women
apparently desire the power to control any man they meet. As Aldrich puts it, “such women
were seen to pose a definite threat to the Victorian male establishment” (Aldrich 160). By
referring to her as an “adventuress”, the king essentially tells the reader that Adler is a

63
disruption to the natural order and the normal way things are run. And this is not
surprising when the reader learns what it is she does for a living.
When Holmes looks Miss Adler up in his index, the reader learns that she is an
American and a former prima donna (Doyle CSH 165). Her nationality and her occupation
further distance her from the stereotypical woman of her time. As a woman born in New
Jersey, she is an outsider and someone who would not necessarily feel compelled to
assimilate into the European societal norms. As an opera singer, she was a part of a
profession that involved lots of traveling and not much setting down of roots. It was also a
profession notoriously linked with women who become royal mistresses. In the late
nineteenth century, Lillie Langtry and Lola Montez were two women whose lives resemble
that of Irene Adler. In 1877, Langtry was seated next to the Prince of Wales at a dinner
party. He quickly became infatuated with the young actress and made her his mistress. It
was common knowledge at the time that royalty engaged in extramarital activities, and
Langtry was the perfect choice for a mistress. As an actress she garnered a lot of attention,
was well-traveled and talked about. She was also a strong-willed woman. One particularly
vulgar but wonderful anecdote has the Prince complaining that “I’ve spent enough on you
to build a battleship,” and Langtry replying “And you’ve spent enough in me to float one”.
Lola Montez did not have a successful career as a dancer, but she did become a courtesan to
Ludwig I of Bavaria. However, her arrogance and influence over the king made her
extremely unpopular. In addition to being renowned mistresses, these women also found
themselves in great cultural circles. Langtry was a friend of Oscar Wilde while Montez is

64
said to have had an affair with Franz Liszt and been friends with George Sand.24 From what
the king tells Holmes and Watson about Adler, she seems a prime candidate to be a royal
mistress and to be someone who would use her profession and cultured ways to move up
in society. This makes her appears as a devious and cunning woman who would stop at
nothing to get what she wants.
So, what does Irene Adler want? Well, the king provides an answer to that question
in his final description of her:
[Irene Adler] Threatens to send them [the king’s family and betrothed] the
photograph. And she will do it. I know that she will do it. You do not know her, but
she has a soul of steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind
of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there are
no lengths to which she would not go – none (Doyle CSH 166)
According to his majesty, Adler is employing an “if-I-can’t-have-him-no-one-can”
philosophy, a rather petty motivation. But the king also said that Miss Adler is essentially a
beautiful woman who acts like a man, with strength and resolve. And she is willing to turn
that resolve to threats simply because a man with whom she had a brief relationship with is
going to marry someone else? That seems unlikely. But, then again, consider the source: the
person telling Holmes and Watson that crazy jealousy and desire for the king are behind
Irene’s threats is, well, the king himself. For Irene’s part, she ends up marrying a man she
deems “better than he [the king]” (Doyle CSH 175). She also promises never to release the
photograph, though she chooses to hold onto it as a sort of protection. Perhaps jealousy
was a motive made up in the apparently self-confident mind of the king. Then again, Adler
24

Biographies of Langtry and Montez come from The Oxford Dictionary of National
Biography

65
does refer to the king’s wronging of her in her final letter, seeming unhappy with the way
things between them had turned out. Maybe she resented the fact that she was never
actually a viable marital option for him. Towards the end of the story the king laments that
“Would she have not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pity that she was not on my
level?” (Doyle CSH 175). Social conventions, that appear to exist in Bohemia as well as in
England, state that a woman of Irene Adler’s status would never be an acceptable match for
royalty as anything more than a mistress. The king certainly seems to wish he could have
married her. Perhaps his inability to do so made him believe she pined as much for him as
he did her. Given what we know about Miss Adler’s character, it is strongly possible that
her motives behind the threat were purely to secure power over someone in the royal
family; jealousy may not have factored into it after all. It was, perhaps, just a way for her to
get back at a man who “cruelly wronged” her. In the king’s mind, however, all roads lead
back to his being so desirable that a woman would threaten blackmail to stop his wedding.
Which means that even his descriptions of Miss Adler may be somehow unreliable.
When Watson first sets eyes on Irene Adler, he certainly thinks the king was
mistaken in the descriptions he had given of the woman. As Watson waits outside Adler’s
house for Holmes’ cue to yell, “Fire!” he begins to feel badly about what he is doing:
I do not know whether he [Holmes] was seized with compunction at that moment
for the part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of
myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was
conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waited upon the injured man.
(Doyle CSH 172)

66
Watson has been a soldier - he has presumably killed people – and yet he is his most
ashamed at the prospect of tricking a beautiful woman. Her beauty is only part of the cause
for his hesitation. More importantly, she is behaving as a good Victorian woman should.
Watson writes that Adler is taking care of Holmes – whom she believes to be an injured
clergyman – with “grace” and “kindliness.” These qualities bring to mind an image of the
Victorian woman as the “angel in the house.” At the time Doyle was writing, the idea of
domesticity was viewed as an inherently feminine quality. A woman was expected to take
care of house and home with grace and ease. The fact that Watson feels so badly about
tricking this woman is because in his eyes she represents all that is good and pure in an
upstanding Victorian lady – beauty, grace, kindness. Then Watson goes on and justifies his
and Holmes’ actions to himself:
I hardened my heart…After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are but
preventing her from injuring another. (Doyle CSH 172)
Watson tells himself that he and Holmes are simply helping Irene by preventing her from
doing something drastic, like threatening a King. The implication here is that Miss Adler
knows not what she is doing and that it is the responsibility of the men to stop her from
causing harm to someone else. They are protecting her from herself. This justification
brings to mind the idea of pleading insanity in a murder trial. Watson seems to be applying
this concept to Irene, which makes it seem as though her natural state as a woman puts her
on par with an insane man who has no control over his actions, nor any idea of their
consequences. She is, in Watson’s mind, a graceful and kind woman who needs to be
protected, even from herself. Essentially, Watson portrays Adler as a good Victorian
woman who needs help from men to stop her from committing a crime.

67
But, we know from the beginning of the story that Watson’s opinion of this woman
changes. Though the bulk of the opening is a description of Holmes’s feelings towards
Adler, the last sentence is Watson giving his own opinion to the reader. He writes “And yet
there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler of dubious and
questionable memory” (Doyle CSH 161). Later in the story, Watson mentions Adler and he
tells the reader that he will continue to call her that, rather than use Holmes’ respectful title
of “The Woman” (Doyle CSH 172). This new view of Irene Adler is added by Watson once
the story reaches its end. When he went back and looked at this case, these asides and
disparaging labels were added. It leads the reader to ask: what changed between the time
when he regretted tricking the kindly Irene Adler and when he sat down to write about this
adventure? The answer that presents itself is that Adler proved to be less of the lovely
Victorian woman that Watson had originally believed. Once she is seen to be strong-willed
and quick-thinking and fully aware of her actions, she becomes a different kind of woman.
Watson, good old traditional Watson, decides she is of questionable memory when she no
longer fits into the category of femininity that he respects and to which he responds. Irene
Adler is no Mary Morstan - she is no damsel in distress who really needs to be saved by
Holmes and Watson. No, Irene Adler is a player in her own right. This makes her more
disreputable in Watson’s eyes; what it does for Holmes’ opinion of her is another story.
Throughout the canon, readers will see Holmes interact with several women in
different ways. Sometimes they are clients, sometimes they are the criminals, and
sometimes they are simply suspects. First, we have Miss Violet Hunter in “The Adventure
of the Copper Beeches”. Miss Hunter comes to Holmes and Watson to seek help when her
employer begins acting strangely. Throughout the story, she proves to be an intelligent

68
woman, so much so that Watson apparently sees her as a potential mate for Holmes. At the
story’s conclusion he writes, “As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my
disappointment, manifested no further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the
centre of one of his problems” (Doyle CSH 332). If Miss Violet Hunter seems so right for
Holmes, why does she not appear as a potential love interest for him in later adaptations?
She is a name only known to those familiar with this story, while her predecessor, Adler is
known to anyone with a passing familiarity with Holmes. This is most likely because Miss
Hunter, though smart, is not able to outsmart Holmes. Then there is Mrs. Gibson from “The
Problem of Thor Bridge”. Though her status as victim might make it seem as though she
would not be an important figure to look at alongside Adler, Mrs. Gibson is unique in that
she is also the criminal of the story. Jealous of her husband’s attraction to Miss Dunbar,
their governess, Mrs. Gibson came up with a plot to kill herself in such a way that the girl
would be framed and arrested. That level of jealousy is clearly stronger than Adler’s, and
yet the name of Mrs. Gibson and the story itself do not often come up when discussing
Doyle’s works. Perhaps this is because Holmes figures it out in the end and Mrs. Gibson is
not successful in her treachery. Miss Hunter is a potential love interest and Mrs. Gibson is
clever enough to almost fool Holmes, yet it is Adler who is always remembered
From the start, we know that Irene Adler is an important figure through her
identification as “The Woman”. She holds this title in the attic-like mind of the great
Sherlock Holmes. In fact, the entire opening of the story sounds like it is from Holmes’
perspective, as dictated to Watson. The reader is told that Adler “eclipses the whole of her
sex” in Holmes’ eyes, but that is quickly followed with a caveat, one that sounds very much
like the voice of Holmes himself:

69
It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and
that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise, but admirably balanced
mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the
world has seen; but as a lover he would place himself in a false position. (Doyle CSH
161)
It almost sounds as though Watson read aloud from his narrative and, upon hearing Adler
given such high praise, Holmes quickly jumped in to dissuade any notion of romantic
feeling. The use of the word “machine” brings the reader back to the previously recorded
adventure, The Sign of Four. After Miss Mary Morstan had left their flat, Watson was
appalled that Holmes did not seem to appreciate the woman’s beauty. The doctor referred
to his companion as “an automaton – a calculating machine” and told him “there is
something positively inhuman in you at times,” (Doyle CSH 96). in “A Scandal in Bohemia”,
Watson is again comparing Holmes to a machine, except this time, it seems like a
compliment. His reasoning and observation skills make him not like other humans, but that
is not necessarily a bad thing. From The Sign of Four to “A Scandal in Bohemia” Watson
seems to have learned to appreciate the factors that set Holmes apart. Attraction and
emotion get in the way of what Holmes does best. In fact, later in the story, Watson
mentions Holmes being, “as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime…” (Doyle CSH
161). Crime and detection are attractive to Sherlock Holmes – and that is beneficial.
Attraction to a woman would be a hindrance. And so Watson – or just possibly Holmes –
tries to make sure the reader understands that any lasting impression Adler makes will not
be one of a romantic kind. The idea of love is compared to “grit” in the mechanism of
Holmes’ mind. However, we learn after his first encounter with Adler – when he

70
inadvertently acts as a witness to her wedding – that he is able to appreciate that she is
beautiful. When he tells Watson of his adventure, he mentions that, “I only caught a glimpse
of her at the moment, but she was a lovely woman with a face that a man might die for”
(Doyle CSH 169). Holmes can acknowledge beauty; through his observations he can tell that
she is, objectively, an attractive woman. He does not, however, let the reader know how the
beauty makes him feel. He acknowledges it only by the narrative he is able to create around
it. He can see what her beauty might inspire in others. That being said, he also
acknowledges that Miss Adler’s groom, Mr. Godfrey Norton, is a “remarkably handsome
man” (Doyle CSH 168). Holmes is able to identify beauty in both sexes, yet neither seems to
have an effect on him. But if her beauty does not inspire feelings of love or lust within the
detective, what is it that makes Adler “The Woman”?
The answer to this question has to do with the fact that Irene Adler is very similar to
Holmes himself. For starters, they are both singular beings. The fact that Adler is defined as
an adventuress makes her unique. Her ability to be both the kindly gracious Victorian
woman as well as one who threatens also sets her apart. She is a mass of contradictions –
face of a woman, drive of a man, an opera singer and adventuress, but not a woman who
sleeps with a married royal – which all combine to make her “the” one and only woman.
Sherlock Holmes is unique himself in that he is the only existing consulting detective,
because he created the job. He represents a new class of crime-fighter. Another connection
the two characters have is their ability to think logically and methodically. In her letter to
Holmes at the end of the story, Adler explains how she came to beat him to the punch and
escape before he got the picture:

71
You really did it very well. You took me in completely. Until after the alarm of fire, I
had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I began to
think. (Doyle CSH 174)
Like Holmes himself, Adler is able to adapt to new situations. Once she realized that Holmes
had tricked her into revealing the location of the photograph, she immediately began to
think of her new plan. Her ability to think on her feet and to work out what had happened
puts her in a position as a thinker similar to Holmes. The other quality that solidifies their
connection is the fact that each is a master/mistress of disguise. The first time Holmes
appears to Miss Adler, he is dressed as a “drunken-looking groom,” the second time he is a
“simple minded clergyman” (Doyle CSH 167 & 170). Once she realizes she has been tricked,
Adler reflects on the fact that she had been inclined to trust him when he was in clerical
garb (Doyle CSH 174). She, like Watson, was taken in by Holmes’ disguise; but, because she
is such a singular woman herself, Irene is able to trick Holmes in return. Her background
gives her the ability to slip by Holmes and Watson in plain sight:
But, you know I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costume is nothing
new to me. I often take advantage of the freedom which it gives. (Doyle CSH 175)
Adler cheekily bids goodnight to Holmes and Watson while dressed as a young man.
Holmes remarks that “I have heard that voice before”, and yet is unable to identify her
(Doyle CSH 173). The fact that she dresses as a man further identifies her as a woman who
pushes boundaries of society. The mere fact that she gains “freedom” dressing as a man
shows readers that Adler recognizes her limitations, but does not let them hold her back.
Because Adler and Holmes are so similar, the story features a constantly shifting
balance of power. Holmes disguises himself and hopes to find out what sort of nefarious

72
deeds she is up to with Mr. Godfrey Norton, only to realize that she was simply getting
married. He then dresses up again to trick her into revealing her secret hiding place – she
does and he wins that round. However, at the end of the story, Miss Adler comes out on top.
The fact that she outsmarts Holmes, and the fact that she is a she are what make her an
enduring character. The reader, however, must ask why it is that she beats the great
detective. He is not easily beaten, so why does this one work out in her favor? First of all,
Adler manages to trick Holmes simply by acting honorably. When they find her gone,
Holmes, Watson, and their royal client assume she will use the photograph for some sort of
blackmail. However, Adler promises not to do so unless the king should act against her. Her
honor and the strength of her word throw Holmes for a loop at the story’s end.
Another reason Irene Adler has to come out the winner is because she represents
the future. In his own way, Holmes signifies the future of detection; his use of the
microscope and his ways of thinking are beyond the skills and abilities of the police force.
But Adler is even more modern than that. As a new kind of woman, she is able to adapt to
new situations. She is a fluid being whose versatility enables her to win. Adler
demonstrates this fluidity by playing a range of roles just in this one story. She threatens
like a criminal but is also a woman who takes in an injured clergyman to help him. She is a
resolute woman with a “soul of steel” who falls in love and is able to leave past wrongs in
the past. Irene Adler plays all of these roles with such finesse that it is clear they are part of
her very being. As a female character that represents a completely new and modern kind of
figure, it makes sense that she would be the one woman to stand out to the ever-lookingforward Sherlock Holmes.

73
BBC’s Sherlock – Knowing When You’re Beaten with the Dominatrix and the Detective
Irene Adler makes her appearance in the second season premiere of the BBC’s
Sherlock. The episode is appropriately titled “A Scandal in Belgravia” and first aired on May
6th, 2012. In this episode, Sherlock and John are tasked by a mysterious and royal client to
get some compromising photographs back from a dominatrix named Irene Adler. Along the
way it becomes clear that compromising photographs are only one part of her arsenal.
Within the episode she fakes her own death, enlists the help of the Baker Street Boys and
assists Moriarty with plans to commit an act of terrorism. The viewer’s first image of Irene
is of a red-nailed hand holding a phone. This shot comes right after Moriarty gets a phone
call that stops him in his plans to kill Sherlock and John25. By having Irene’s hand as the
next image, the viewer sees a connection established between her and Moriarty. In making
such a connection, writer Steven Moffat and director Paul McGuigan bring together two of
the most enduring of Doyle’s characters. Allying Irene Adler with Jim Moriarty so early on
turns her into a much more nefarious character than Doyle’s scorned woman whose
motives were never truly clear. In fact, Irene’s loyalties are constantly in flux throughout
this episode. Another question one finds oneself asking as we watch the episode is whether
or not Irene Adler ends up on top in this particular incarnation. Though the power dynamic
constantly changes, I would argue that in the end, Irene dominates Sherlock, in this case in
more ways than one.
For starters, we must look at how Irene Adler is portrayed in this adaptation. Played
by Lara Pulver, this incarnation has a very different title associated with her than
“adventuress”. After we see her hand holding the phone that called Moriarty, we watch
25

We had last seen Sherlock and John about to be shot by snipers in a school pool as
Moriarty told them that they had become an obstacle.

74
Irene walk towards a room. Seen from the back, the audience is treated to a clear view of
her undergarments through her black lace dress; in her hands, she holds a riding crop. She
addresses an unseen figure by asking, “Have you been wicked your highness?” (“A Scandal
in Belgravia” (“ASiB”) 3:39). As she snaps the riding crop, we realize that we are looking at
a royal mistress for the modern age: this Irene Adler is a dominatrix. The next time we see
Irene, she is stroking a newspaper photo of Sherlock and then her riding crop. The link
between attraction and domination is established even before we have seen her face. The
first time an image of Irene’s face appears onscreen, it is in a photograph that Sherlock is
given (“ASiB” 17:51). This intentional withholding of her face from the audience until
Sherlock sees her for the first time mirrors nicely to the way Doyle had most of the
information about Miss Adler come before the detective had even met her. In this instance,
we see Irene and Sherlock looking at photos of each other simultaneously; setting up an
even playing field. During this moment, we get a narrative description of Irene from
Mycroft. The elder Holmes informs Sherlock that, “She’s been at the center of two political
scandals in the past year and recently ended the marriage of a prominent novelist by
having an affair with both participants, separately” (“ASiB” 18:02-18:10). According to
Mycroft “there are many names for what she does. She prefers ‘dominatrix’” (“ASiB” 18:26).
He also introduces that infamous title of “The Woman,” which Adler herself uses on her
website, where she also encourages you to “know when you’re beaten.” This is one way
Irene is adapted to the twenty-first century. In a world where women can ostensibly do
anything, the way she separates herself is through her highly sexualized profession.
As he gets ready to meet Irene, Sherlock tells John that, “going into battle, I need the
right armor” (“ASiB” 22:08). He treats their meeting as a war – and so does she. Irene tells

75
her assistant she plans to wear her “battledress” (“ASiB” 23:15). For Sherlock, the armor
becomes a vicar’s collar, for Irene it is her naked body. From the start, Irene uses her
comfort with sexuality to disarm and discombobulate Sherlock. And it works. As she sits in
front of him, totally naked, Sherlock realizes that he cannot read her at all. She is a blank
slate and he can deduce nothing. Is this because she is completely bared, leaving him
without his usual physical clues? Or is it because she represents a kind of woman that he
has never dealt with before: a woman who seems to have no shame and who will look him
square in the eye? Women and sexuality are things with which Sherlock does not have a lot
of experience. To see that we need only look at the very first episode where he declared
girlfriends to not be his “area”. Or, we could even look to this very episode, when Sherlock
insists that sex doesn’t frighten him, prompting Mycroft to ask how he would know. The
implication that Sherlock might very well be a virgin contrasts him most mightily against
this woman whose entire being revolves around sexuality. Even when she tries to get
Sherlock to give back the phone with the photos, she chants, “Give it to me” over and over –
arguably sexual.
In Doyle’s story, the reader sees that Watson’s opinion of Irene Adler changes from
the time he actually encounters her to when he finally sits down to write about the
adventure. A similar shift happens here. When John first locks eyes on Irene in all her
nakedness, he is immediately flustered and asks her to put clothes on. However, he also
tries to make her notice him by answering questions she had only asked Sherlock. After
Irene drugs Sherlock and takes back her phone, John’s opinion of her shifts away from
confused but attracted and becomes more annoyed. As he listens to the vulgar moans that

76
come with every text she sends Sherlock26, it is clear to the viewer that John is slightly
exasperated. He does not seem to support a relationship between the two, though he does
seem intrigued by the possibility that Sherlock might actually be attracted to someone..
After Irene fakes her death to avoid trouble with some bad guys, John is the one to discover
she is actually alive. What are his first words upon seeing her? - “Tell him you’re alive”
(“ASiB” 53:28). This statement, followed by a threat to come after her if she does not,
shows John’s concern for the well-being of Sherlock. John may not understand what is
going on between Sherlock and Irene but he knows enough to see how much her supposed
death has affected the detective. It is clear from his face that John’s opinion of Irene, which
originally leaned towards intrigue, lowers considerably when she hurts and upsets his
friend. Doyle’s Watson changes his opinion of the woman when he realizes she is not really
a perfect, sweet Victorian woman. The BBC’s John changes his opinion of her when she
hurts his friend one too many times.
And what about Sherlock himself? Just as in the original source material, this
adaptation leaves the audience in constant wonder about how exactly Sherlock feels about
Irene. This time, however, it has more to do with sexual and physical attraction than
romance. From the moment he is told what she does for a living and how she protects her
best interests, Sherlock realizes that Irene is simply interested in a power play. Much like
her Victorian counterpart, this Irene makes it clear that she is no blackmailer. Doyle’s Adler
makes a threat such as is usually found in blackmail, but she has not specific request. She
lets the king know that she has the photograph and tells him she will show it to his family
and fiancée. But she does not give him an “unless”. There appears to be nothing she wants

26

She took the liberty of changing his ringtone.

77
in exchange for the promise of not releasing the photo. In the end, she promises not to do
so simply of her own accord. The BBC’s Irene is similar. She explains that she keeps the
pictures “not for blackmail, just for insurance” (“ASiB” 33:36-33:38). They appear to be
protection against some unknown but dangerous entity. Perhaps it is Moriarty, or perhaps
it is the British government, or perhaps someone even worse. The point is that her true
endgame is power, which honestly intrigues and possibly excites Sherlock; she clearly has a
powerful effect on him. When he first sees her in person, he is rendered speechless by her
nudity. However, it is not a flustered speechless necessarily, at least not like John’s.
Regardless of whether or not he is aroused, Sherlock bounces back and quickly moves on to
goading her in order to make her think about the case that had recently been brought to his
attention. It involves a man in a car and a man looking at the river. The first man’s car
backfires and the other man drops down dead. Sherlock is endeavoring to figure out what
happened27 and brings Irene into his “mind palace” with him as he attempts to work it out.
They talk it over in his fantasy world like a pair of detectives on a procedural drama. She is
established as someone who could easily be a detective like Sherlock. But once again, like
with John, it is not enough for Sherlock and Irene to seem just like potential partners. It
turns out that Irene has hidden the photographs in a safe and Sherlock has limited time to
figure out the code28. Irene insists that he does know the code and he just needs to think.
Eventually, it turns out the code is Irene’s measurements. The fact that Sherlock does figure
it out implies that he was closely inspecting her body, possibly out of attraction. But maybe
it is just some of that good old-fashioned Holmesian observation. Regardless of how he was

27

It turns out a boomerang clocked the victim on the head.
There are some angry Americans with guns who also want the pictures and want them
quickly.
28

78
able to figure out that code, there are several moments that point to the possibility that
Sherlock might be attracted to Irene. First off he never responds to her many text requests
for dinner. When Irene tells John about this, the doctor is in disbelief because Sherlock is
“Mr. Punchline” and always craves the last word. Irene asks the question many viewers
have: Does that make her special? (“ASiB” 54:49 & 54:52). Everyone around Sherlock
seems to think that she is special to him. When she is found dead (though not really),
Mycroft, John, and Mrs. Hudson prepare for Sherlock to relapse into drug use. They all
expect him to react horribly to her death because they all assume that she is important to
him somehow, most likely in a romantic way. But knowing Sherlock’s virtually nonexistent
romantic history it seems unlikely that it is love he feels for this woman. So, we once again
come back to the question of what makes Irene Adler so important.
Unlike Doyle’s stories, there are women in the BBC universe who appear in
essentially all of the episodes. Mrs. Hudson does show up several times in the canon but her
presence is much clearer and frequent in this television adaptation. In this particular
episode, Sherlock quickly jumps to Mrs. Hudson’s rescue after his older brother tells her to
“shut up”. He quickly chastises Mycroft, though he then tells her that she should, in fact,
shut up. Later in the episode, Sherlock protects Mrs. Hudson yet again when she is held
hostage by those angry Americans - who are still in search of Irene’s phone. After making
sure his landlady is alright, Sherlock takes revenge on the attacker by throwing him out of a
window…several times. The other woman in this episode is Molly Hooper. Prior to this
second season, the audience has seen that Molly is greatly attracted to Sherlock. We have
also seen Sherlock use that to his advantage by putting on the charm until she agrees to
help him with something and then letting the smile slip off his face. His treatment of Molly

79
Hooper at the 221B Christmas party is particularly painful to watch. He uses his brilliant
deductive skills to conclude that Molly has a new boyfriend for whom she carefully
wrapped a present (while the others look like garbage, apparently) and put on nice lipstick
(to distract from the small size of her mouth), etc. etc. It comes as a surprise to no one in
the room but Sherlock that the special gift is for him. What does surprise the others is that
he apologizes, for, as Molly puts it “always saying such horrible things”. He kisses her on
the cheek and in that moment we see the humanity that is Sherlock. Of course, he also
disregards and is downright rude to John’s current girlfriend, but that is unsurprising. The
point of it all is that this episode features some very important moments between Sherlock
and the women in his life. Yet, Irene Adler stands out above all others.
It all comes back to the idea of the balance of power. Throughout the episode, we see
power shift hands between Sherlock and Irene, much more frequently than within the
canon story. The best way to illustrate how power transfers is to diagram it
chronologically:
1.

When the pair first lay eyes on each other, Irene catches Sherlock off-guard by being
naked while at the same time immediately seeing through his disguise. Power:
Irene

2.

By employing his smoke alarm ruse, Sherlock tricks Irene into looking towards her
hiding place for the phone. Power: Sherlock

3.

However, Sherlock is so sure of himself after he gets the phone away from her that
he fails to see what it coming. In this case it is a needle in the back that knocks him
out. Power: Irene

80
4.

As Irene sends text after text asking Sherlock to have dinner with her, he ignores
every single one. Power: Sherlock

5.

Her faking her own death reveals how much of a hold she really has on him (sexual,
romantic, or otherwise) as his friends begin to think his drug addiction is starting
again. Power: Irene

6.

He finally texts back “Happy New Year – SH” and gets the last word. Power:
Sherlock

7.

He makes a dummy phone in order to get her to finally enter her passcode after he’s
been wrong twice. Power: Sherlock….

8.

…and she sees right through it. Power: Irene

9.

Irene presents Sherlock with a string of seemingly unrelated numbers and letters
that she knows are important. But she does not know how. He quickly figures out
they refer to a specific flight. Power: Sherlock

10.

And she sends the information on to Moriarty. Power: Irene

11.

He finally figures out her passcode because he actually measured her attraction to
him via her pulse and dilated pupils. He has the ability to destroy her. She asks “Are
you expecting me to beg?” and he says yes (“ASiB” 1:22:07). The dominatrix
becomes the dominated. Power: Sherlock

All through the episode, the position of the power shifts. The pattern shows us that the way
Sherlock has power taken from him is by being so confident in what he has accomplished
that he fails to see her next step. On the other hand, Irene only seems to lose power in little
ways until the end. Her final downfall being linked to her attraction to Sherlock seems to

81
illustrate a rather sexist view of this figure. Up until that final reveal, Irene was portrayed
as a character that knew how to use her sexuality to her advantage. Most of her intel was a
direct result of her knowing “what men like,” be they detectives or judges. However,
something about Sherlock so affects her that she is unable to keep her cool and collected
professional nature. To put it simply, her crush on the boy leads to her losing her hold over
some of the most powerful people in the country. It is understandable that this may be
problematic for some or even many. In an article for The Guardian, entitled “Is Sherlock
Sexist? Steven Moffat’s wanton women”, Jane Clare Jones puts this annoyance into words:
More troubling still, Moffat’s Adler blatantly fails to outwit Holmes. Despite
identifying as a lesbian, her scheme is ultimately undone by her great big girly crush
on Sherlock, an irresistible brain-rot that leads her to trash the security she has
fought for from the start of the show with a gesture about as sophisticated – or
purposeful – as scrawling love hearts on an exercise book. (Jones 3)
Jones is referring to the fact that Adler’s pass code for her phone ends up being “I am
Sherlocked”. This article makes a good point, but then again, Irene could have used his
name as her pass code for a joke and assumed it would be his last guess. Regardless of
whether this gesture makes Irene a sexist view of a woman, it is undeniable that it takes
away some of her power. There is a distinct implication that feeling something akin to love
or a crush makes one weak. Sherlock even tells us “sentiment is a defect found on the losing
side” (“ASiB” 1:20:12).
The entire concept of love plays a bizarre role in this relationship. When we hear the
word love it brings to mind a sense of care between people, be they family or significant
others. In romantic relationships, it is easy to assume that sex becomes intertwined with

82
the idea of love. However, for someone like Irene, love and sex play totally different roles.
Her job involves sex, but the personal connections usually associated with love are not
there. So, it is a sexual encounter without any romantic obstacles. Then again, the role of a
dominatrix is all about power, so that fits into the spectrum as well. Love, sex, and power
are three entities that help us try to fully understand what it is Irene and Sherlock feel for
one another. Because of her profession, we see an Irene who is deeply involved in sex and
power. But that does not mean we have any clue what she might be like in an actual and
non-professional relationship. We get clues that she might be gay – such as her friend Kate
who seems to be very close to her, and her telling Watson that she is (“ASiB” 55:15).
However, she also flirts with Sherlock. So a lot is up in the air about her actual romantic
inclinations. It is easy to assume she is genuinely attracted to Sherlock simply based on the
way she talks to him. When Sherlock decodes the string of numbers, she does not express
awe at his brilliance or give him a congratulatory high five. She says “I would have you right
here on this desk until you begged for mercy twice” (“ASiB”1:08:14-1:08:17). It sounds like
a come on, and right in front of John. But, at this point, it seems that everything Irene says is
planned and calculated to elicit some sort of response. When she first meets John and
Sherlock she informs them that, “I like detective stories and detectives. Brainy is the new
sexy” (“ASiB” 26:49-26:51). It is all designed to draw in Sherlock. Or, in the case of telling
him what she would do to him, to knock him off-balance a bit. But one could argue that it is
all bravado, that it is all planned dialogue. So, we are left with two options. She is either A)
completely fabricating an attraction to him or B) actually sexually attracted to Sherlock
Holmes and just sharing her true feelings. It appears that it should be a “one or the other”
kind of deal, but can she not be both? The way Sherlock determines her attraction to him is

83
through involuntary biological processes – her pulse quickens when he touches her and her
pupils dilate. It is completely possible that Irene did not even realize how deep her
attraction the detective was. Perhaps somewhere along the way, in the tradition of every
makeover romantic comedy ever, the cool and collected beauty fell for the awkward and
nerdy detective. If this is the case, Irene manages to bring sex, love, and power together
into one character. She uses her sexuality to gain power over Sherlock, but love might be an
unintentional side effect. And it seems to us that that side effect helps her lose her higher
ground.
The final scene also leaves us questioning whether Irene really does dominate in
this adaptation. John learns from Mycroft that Irene was beheaded by a terrorist cell. Her
decides instead to tell Sherlock that she had gone into hiding to keep herself safe from any
enemies. Sherlock does not seem upset. However, what John does not know is that in the
moments before she is executed, Irene sends a text to Sherlock telling him goodbye. As the
sword is raised above Irene’s head, we hear the too familiar sigh of his ringtone. She looks
up into the blue eyes of her “executioner” and he tells her to run on his cue. Tears come to
her eyes and we know that she is saved. So, in her final moments on screen, the dominatrix
truly becomes a damsel in distress who requires the saving skills of Sherlock Holmes. From
the canon, we had learned that Irene does not fit this stereotypical woman figure. Does this
mean that the BBC adaptation is not faithful in its portrayal of Irene? Is it wrong and even
disheartening to see her not triumph over the great detective? Perhaps it would be. Jane
Clare Jones certainly thinks so: “But for those of us crazies who like to think that women
are, y’know, just regular human beings, it [the execution scene] was politically, really quite
regressive” (Jones 3). However, there is reason to believe that this Irene does dominate,

84
even if she requires rescue. The very final moment of the episode shows Sherlock holding
the infamous phone and chuckling to himself as he repeats the phrase “The Woman”.
Irene’s hold on him is apparent in this moment and we see that she did ultimately dominate
his mind. In fact, a future episode has her appearing naked in his mind palace as he tries to
solve a case (“The Sign of Three”). He obviously holds her in regard and cared enough to
save her, yet we still are left with the impression that it is not a romantic connection. So, the
final question: What makes her dominant in this situation? Doyle’s Irene was able to pull a
fast one on Holmes because she represented a future that even the very modern detective
could not see. The BBC’s Irene is similar in a way. It is all about seeing ahead. The fact that
she was able to stay two steps ahead of Sherlock up until the end puts her on an intellectual
plane that is equal to his own. The fact that it is a woman outsmarting him is less shocking
in a modern adaptation; it is more simply the fact that anyone can outthink Sherlock for any
period of time. Up until Irene, Moriarty is the only other figure who could hold a candle to
the brilliance of Sherlock. But she is able to anticipate his moves and see even farther ahead
than he can. And much like in the canon, we see that, although she may sometimes seem to
be a typical woman figure, there is more to her than that. This is once again because Irene
is a woman who pushes the boundaries of what is expected of her. The end result is a
dominatrix who truly dominates the detective.

CBS’ Elementary – The Detective and His One True Love
When it was first announced, Elementary prompted much discussion due to its
decision to feature Lucy Liu as a female Watson. This, however, would not be the only

85
massive alteration the writers would make when adapting and modernizing Doyle’s
characters. Before looking at how Irene is portrayed in this television show, there is one
crucial element to address [spoilers ahead]. On Elementary, Irene Adler and Moriarty are
revealed to be one and the same. This fact would seem to make discussing Irene without
discussing Moriarty very difficult; the show, however, makes the distinctions very clear.
Actress Natalie Dormer is listed as one or the other character depending on which episode
we are discussing, so, it is possible to look at Irene on her own. And this Irene provides an
interesting image because while, like her predecessors, she has a control over Sherlock
Holmes, this time, it is more related to an emotional hold.
The flesh and blood Irene Adler does not appear until the third to last episode of
Season One of Elementary – “Risk Management”. Even with her limited screen time,
however, the character of Irene is still able to establish dominance over Sherlock Holmes.
In the very first episode, Watson had determined that there was a woman in Sherlock’s past
who turned him into the man he is today:
S: In case you hadn’t noticed, I don’t have meaningful connections. Why are you
smiling?
J: Because now I know it was a woman.
S: What makes you say that?
J: You’re trying too hard. Just like you were the other day with that tattooed lady. All
that ‘sex is repellant’ crap. You can connect to other people. It just frightens you.
(“Pilot” 37:56-38:31)
Earlier in the episode, viewers were shown that this Sherlock has no aversions to sex, but
sees it as utilitarian. He claimed that it was “repellant. All those fluids and odd sounds. But

86
my brain and my body require it to function at optimal levels” (“Pilot” 4:44-4:50). Clearly
this Sherlock gets something out of sex that Doyle and the BBC’s Holmes do not. He views it
as a necessity, but even that is unusual for a Holmes But Watson believes that his blasé
attitude towards sex stems from some sort of failed relationship with a woman. She
surmises that there was some very important woman in Sherlock’s life, but he is not
forthcoming with the details. Revisiting this episode once we know the name Irene, it
becomes clear to the audience that she is the woman responsible for making Sherlock into
a man of few serious connections.
Before we see her, though, we learn that Irene is, in a way, responsible for even
more than that. At the start of the series, it is explained that Sherlock and Watson come
together out of his need for a sober companion to help him recover from his heroin
addiction. Right away, Watson had deduced that Sherlock’s lack of strong bonds came from
a bad experience with a woman. However, we learn that this same woman is also linked to
his drug use.
S: I won’t bore you with the details of our courtship. Suffice it to say, I was quite
smitten. Up until that point in my life, I’d found most women quite boring – a, uh,
perfumed and pillowy means to a physiological end. Irene was different.
W: You were in love.
S: Prior to her murder, my drug use had been recreational. Something to do when I
was bored or in need of a boost during a particularly challenging investigation. After
Irene, well, I lost control. (“M” 21:25-21:57)
Throughout the season, viewers, learn that Sherlock believes a killer named Moriarty is
responsible for murdering his beloved Irene. It is her death that sets into motion Sherlock’s

87
drug problem. In this exchange with Watson, we learn that though this Sherlock is more
sexually charged than other incarnations, he is not necessarily more prone to forging
strong emotional ties. Except with Irene. When Watson points out that what made her
different was that Sherlock was in love, the detective quickly moves on to a different
subject. He brings up his drug use and how it took a drastic turn for the worst after losing
Irene. Perhaps he is comfortable admitting her superiority to other women he had known,
but using the word “love” feels too strong. Regardless, there is something about this Irene
Adler that sets her above all other women to which Sherlock had been linked. Where
Doyle’s Adler outsmarted Holmes and Sherlock’s Irene physically dominated him, this Irene
is the love of his life. Her hold is a romantic one. Not only that, but her importance is
increased when you realize that her “death” leads to his addiction which in turn leads to his
meeting Watson. Irene is a sort of catalyst for the creation of the famed pair.
Because Irene physically enters the picture so late, we do not get to see Watson
react to her all that much. However, there is one interaction between Watson and Sherlock
that connects the two women in his life. Sherlock tells Watson:
When I pursued Moran, my entire life I had made one meaningful connection. That
was with Irene Adler. You were preparing to take on a new client, I had every reason
to believe that I would be returning to the solitary methods of old. Since then we’ve
entered into a partnership. It’s an arrangement which I find very rewarding. You’re
and interesting project and I enjoy watching you progress. The thing that’s different
about me, empirically speaking, is you. (“A Landmark Story 23:27-24:05).
Joan Watson is the second meaningful connection in Sherlock’s life and he puts it on the
same level as his romantic relationship with Irene Adler. Our ears might perk up at this

88
comparison and assume that it implies the potential for a romantic connection between
Watson and Sherlock. I think, however, that it is more the reverse, that this comparison is
used to highlight the importance of Irene Adler. After all, the name Watson is universally
paired with Holmes. By showing that Watson is not the first to come along and change
Sherlock’s life, it drives home how important Irene Adler really was.
Finally, in Episode 22, we get a picture of Irene herself. Watson points out that
although Sherlock mentions what happened to Irene, he never talks about what she was
like as a person. True to Doyle’s creation, this Irene is an American29. Instead of an opera
singer, though, she is a different kind of artist:
S: She was an exquisite painter. She made her living restoring Renaissance paintings
for art museums. She traveled extensively because of her work. She was highly
intelligent, optimistic about the human condition…I usually consider it a sign of
stupidity but with Irene, it seemed oddly convincing. She was, to me, the woman. To
me, she eclipsed and predominated the whole of her gender. She’s the only one I
ever…and the sex…I learned things, Watson, me, and that hasn’t happened before.
(“Risk Management” 8:30-9:45)
Her being an artist seems to set Irene up as a counter to Sherlock’s cool, intellectual self.
She is more creative, but not unintelligent, and something about her makes her optimism
appealing to Sherlock. To hear those famous descriptors, straight from Doyle’s story, come
out of Sherlock’s mouth makes them even more powerful than if Watson were narrating it.
Once again, Sherlock stops himself from using the word “love”. All of his actions and
descriptions and his total devastation at her death add up to her being the love of his life,

29

Though Sherlock “held it against her only briefly” (“Risk Management” 8:35)

89
but that word does not pass his lips. So, we finally have a description of this woman – the
woman – and, at the end of the episode, we get out first look. After solving a particular case
put to him by Moriarty, Sherlock is rewarded with an address. Walking through the house,
he and Watson come upon a room full of paintings that are immediately familiar to
Sherlock. As he walks through a room full of Irene’s works, Sherlock shows the most
emotion that he has exhibited yet in the season. His eyes well up and his lower lip trembles
before he finally sees her and collapses (“Risk Management” 42:00). This Sherlock proves
that he is not an automaton when he is faced with the possibility of seeing this allimportant woman again. Her hold on him is made clear by the severity of his reaction.
We learn that Irene was being held and psychologically tormented by a man known
as Mr. Stapleton30. As she goes through recovery, Irene is a shell of the vibrant woman we
get to see through flashbacks. Once again, we have someone who illustrates both sides of a
woman’s personality: she is strong-willed and sexy but also in need of protection. Through
the flashback to Sherlock and Irene’s first meeting, we suddenly understand what it is that
makes her stand out so much to the detective. When he meets her, it is to ask whether
certain pieces are forgeries, she informs him that they are.
I: They’re supposed to be studies for The Fighting Temeraire but they have a
medium orange and ocher in them. In 1839, you needed turmeric to make ocher
paint. But 1839 was also the beginning of your Afghan War. The army
commandeered turmeric for a preservative in rations. That’s why you don’t see
ocher in The Fighting Temeraire. Or any painting from back then.
S: Hmmm. I’m surprised I hadn’t realized that…yet. (“The Woman” 2:38-2:42)

30

Brief shout-out to The Hound of the Baskervilles

90
In their very first meeting, Irene proves herself to be someone who thinks an awful lot like
Holmes. Her reasoning skills and use of logic are very strong and completely off-put the
detective. She states it all so matter-of-factly and he is left trying to save face by pointing
out that he would have come to that conclusion eventually. She appeals to him because she
is unlike anyone else he has met: she can challenge him. He gets a chance to regain his
upper-footing when he points out that she has an original painting hanging on her wall. Yet
again, we have an Irene committing crimes, but not for profit. . She has no plans to sell the
painting, she simply wants to see that it is treated well. Similarly, this is another Irene who
pushes boundaries in some way – the art restorer turned thief and forger. Sherlock says he
can tell her which paintings are reproductions and when he succeeds he will take her out
for an evening in London. She has other ideas:

I’ve already told you that you’re beautiful and I see the way you’re looking at me.
Why would we need to leave this apartment to enjoy each other’s company? (“The
Woman” 5:45)
Another recurring trend with modern Irenes is their use of sexuality to entice the great
detective. Here, Sherlock is not caught off guard and simply refers to it as “a game with
proper stakes”. Clearly, there is a sexual attraction between the two characters. However,
the initial attraction for Sherlock comes when he realizes that this woman can give him an
intellectual run for his money. After she has re-entered his life, Sherlock tells Irene that,
“you’re the only person I ever empathized with” (“The Woman” 27:22). She is his kindred
spirit, his equal. She is the only person to whom he can relate.

91
However, their “love” is not without its downsides. In another flashback, we see
Irene and Sherlock lying naked in bed while he reviews and tells her about a case he is
working on – a killer named Moriarty. As they lay there, he looks at her back and sees
birthmarks he had never noticed before. This prompts him to realize that “even after all
this time, you’re something of a blind spot to me” (“The Woman” 25:28). As in other
incarnations, this Irene is someone who ultimately is unreadable to Sherlock, someone he
does not fully understand. Irene may be very similar to him and on his level intellect-wise,
but she is also mysterious to him, which only seems to increase her appeal. When she is
found, Sherlock realizes that the real obstacle to their relationship is that she will always be
available as a pawn to use against him:
S: He [Moriarty] wants me to understand that as long as you’re in my life, you can
and will be used against me. You are one of the strongest people I have ever met, but
next to a will and a mind like Moriarty’s, you are weak. And because I care for you,
I’m also weak. That is why I need to let you go. (“The Woman” 31:55-32:15)
The BBC’s Sherlock told us that “caring is not an advantage” – and so it would appear on
Elementary as well. Once again, love is tied up with weakness, although this time the
weakness is on Sherlock’s end. By allowing himself to care so much about another person,
Sherlock automatically provides any enemy with the means to unravel him. Thinking that
he had lost Irene for good led to a complete downward spiral into the world of addiction.
Having Irene back, puts him at the mercy of a horrifying murderer who will not hesitate to
take her away for real. This woman, Irene Adler, has the ability to cause the complete
downfall of the great Sherlock Holmes, and not just because she happens to moonlight as
his nemesis. Though we actually see her very little, this Irene proves her power over

92
Sherlock Holmes by the mere fact that being with her, losing her, and gaining her back, all
contribute to making Sherlock into the person he is. Without the loss of Irene, Sherlock
would not have a bar to measure personal connection against. Without the loss of Irene,
Sherlock would not have found himself in a position where he required someone like
Watson. Without getting Irene back, Sherlock would not have realized so fully how to love
and let go. She shapes him and challenges him and that is why CBS’s Irene Adler is able to
have control over Sherlock Holmes.

93

Chapter Three
The Problem of the Villain:
In Which Moriarty is Not Holmes’ Polar Opposite,
but the Yin to His Yang

“You need me or you’re nothing. Because we’re just alike, you and I, except you’re
boring. You’re on the side of the angels.”
(Sherlock “The Reichenbach Fall”)

Every good hero, super or otherwise, needs a villain. Throughout the canon and
subsequent adaptations, Sherlock Holmes has shown himself to be associated with
uncommon variations of common characters found in the hero’s story. Watson is so much
more than his sidekick. Irene is more complicated than the usual leading lady. So it would
make sense that his one true enemy, Moriarty, would prove to be different from what we
would expect in a villain. Indeed, he proves himself to be much closer to his heroic
counterpart than is perhaps comfortable for readers or viewers. In Doyle’s stories, we see a
master criminal who is remarkably similar to Holmes himself. In the BBC’s Sherlock, we get
a similar comparison, with even more attention given to the game played between the two
men. Elementary might have a gender divide between its Sherlock and Moriarty, but that
does not stop the characters from sharing many qualities. What is made clear to us as
readers and as an audience is that Moriarty represents the kind of man Holmes could easily
have become. And since crime is present in all times and places, he is character who easily
shifts settings and takes over as the criminal mastermind du jour.

94
Doyle’s Canon: Where the Criminal and Detective are Uncomfortably Alike
Before looking closely at the character of Moriarty in Doyle’s stories, it is important
to keep in mind one fact: Moriarty was supposed to be the end of Sherlock Holmes. If Doyle
had gotten his way, the detective would never have returned from his tumble over
Reichenbach Falls. In 1893, Doyle published “The Final Problem,” and expected that to be
the last Sherlock Holmes story. Readers, however, were not at all inclined to accept this,
even going so far as to don black armbands in mourning for the fictional detective, and
Doyle soon resurrected Holmes. Nevertheless, Moriarty was supposed to be Holmes’ last
adversary, and that detail is crucial because it tells readers that the former was truly meant
to be a match for the great detective.
Though Moriarty is mentioned in stories that come after “The Final Problem,” his
introduction comes within that story. After an extended separation due to Watson’s
occasionally-appearing wife, Holmes and his former flat mate reunite in time for the
detective to share his difficulties with master criminal Moriarty. After detailing Moriarty’s
nefarious accolades, Holmes explains to Watson that he has a scheme to put Moriarty and
his entire gang behind bars. After this grand bust, the consulting detective intends to retire
happily. According to plan, Holmes and Watson board a train to Switzerland ahead of
Moriarty. Upon arrival, the companions walk up to Reichenbach Falls, where Watson
receives a letter from their hotel, requesting his immediate presence to help with a medical
emergency. He rushes back, but the emergency was not real, merely a ruse to separate him
from Holmes. Watson returns to Reichenbach Falls, only to find his companion gone. In a
rare moment of deductive prowess, Watson determines that Holmes and Moriarty must
have tumbled over the falls together to their deaths. Upon closer inspection of the scene,

95
Watson finds a letter addressed to him in Holmes’ bag. It tells him how it all played out, and
Watson is left mourning his closest friend. Thus ends the illustrious career, and life, of
Sherlock Holmes - that is, until Doyle brings him back in “The Adventure of the Empty
House”.
To better understand Professor James31 Moriarty, we look at him in relation to
Holmes himself. The most notable difference between these men is the fact that one is a
detective and one is a criminal, indeed, the king of criminals. According to Holmes:
He is the Napoleon of crime, Watson. He is the organizer of half that is evil and of
nearly all that is undetected in this great city. He is a genius, a philosopher, an
abstract thinker. He has a brain of the first order. He sits motionless, like a spider in
the centre of its web, but that web has a thousand radiations, and he knows well
every quiver of each of them. …is there a crime to be done, a paper to be abstracted,
we will say, a house to be rifled, a man to be removed – the word is passed to the
professor, the matter is organized and carried out. (Doyle Complete Sherlock Holmes
Volume 2 (CSH) 471)
Moriarty is so much more than a simple criminal; he controls the other criminals of the city.
His methods of running this organization highlight another difference between Holmes and
Moriarty: their modes of getting the job done. Over the course of the canon, Holmes proves
himself to be a very active and physical detective. He is hands-on, going to the scenes of the
crimes and tracking down suspects, donning disguises and moving among the citizens of
London in order to solve his cases. On the other hand, we have Moriarty, who “sits

31

If that is in fact his real first name. His Colonel brother seems to share the moniker
(Doyle CSH 469). So that should tell you how much Doyle paid attention to details like the
names of his characters.

96
motionless” while controlling the actions of others. In this way, he proves to be more
similar to that other Holmes boy, Mycroft. Back in “The Greek Interpreter,” Holmes
describes his older brother in a way that explains why he was not also a detective:
[Holmes] I said that he was my superior in observation and deduction. If the art of
the detective began and ended in reasoning from an armchair, my brother would be
the greatest criminal agent that ever lived. But he has no ambition and no energy.
(Doyle CSH 436)
According to the younger Holmes brother, a great detective cannot be someone who
refuses to go out and get his answers. Based on the Moriarty model of criminal activity,
however, one can become highly successful simply by remaining still and having others do
the leg work.
When it comes to the villainy of Moriarty, Doyle lets his readers know that such
inclinations are inherited. Holmes says “But the man had hereditary tendencies of the most
diabolical kind. A criminal strain ran in his blood which, instead of being modified, was
increased and rendered infinitely more dangerous by his extraordinary mental powers”
(Doyle CSH 470-71). Doyle appears to be telling us that criminal nature is a genetic trait. In
fact, it was not an uncommon belief at the time that physical characteristics pointed to a
proclivity for crime. Cesare Lombroso, an Italian criminologist in the nineteenth century,
put forward the idea that crime was a trait of human nature. He also focused on the use of
physiognomy, a way of indentifying criminals by their physical features. His book, Criminal
Man, puts into words these beliefs:
Those who have read this far should be persuaded that criminals resemble savages
and the colored races. These three groups have many characteristics in common,

97
including thinness of body hair, low degrees of strength and below-average weight,
small cranial capacities, sloping foreheads, and swollen sinuses. Members of both
groups frequently have sutures of the central brow ridge, precocious synostes or
disarticulation of the frontal bones, upwardly arching temporal bones, sutural
simplicity, thick skulls, overdeveloped jaws and cheekbones, oblique eyes, dark skin,
thick and curly hair, and jug ears. (Lombroso 91)
Obviously, Lombroso’s conclusions are dated and racist, and would be recognized today as
racial profiling. What stands, though, out is the specificity with which Lombroso describes
this class of person, the clearly described physical attributes that are singled out as
identifiers. By Lombroso’s logic, simply looking at Moriarty should raise some red flags; he
may be a white man of Irish descent, but he should possess physical traits that identify him
as a criminal. But we will learn that Moriarty does not have these physically criminal traits.
People should be able to look at him and see that he is evil, but blood is not visible and his
criminality is hereditary.
Along with Moriarty’s dangerously criminal genetics, he sets himself apart from the
detective by being a professor of mathematics while Holmes is first identified as a chemist.
This might seem like a subtle distinction; for someone who is more versed in the literary
side of academics, math and science seem to go hand in hand as the talents of those leftbrained thinkers. But when trying to parse out what separates Holmes from Moriarty, their
fields help provide more insight. As previously mentioned, Holmes is the more active of the
pair, while Moriarty is much more sedentary. Appropriately, chemistry requires the
experimenter to mix formulas, to identify compounds, to create physical tests in order to
reach conclusions. Mathematics, on the other hand, is a much more internal study; any

98
work not done within the brain is usually carried out on paper, requiring more writing and
less need for a Bunsen burner. Holmes’ scientific interests also prove helpful in his chosen
career, for example, enabling him to devise a test to identify the presence of blood at a
crime scene. Moriarty’s math expertise is perhaps useful when it comes time to carry out
his criminal accounting, but the skills do not necessarily lend themselves to his running of a
crime network.
The concrete differences between Holmes and Moriarty are few and far between;
our short time with the criminal is much more useful in pointing out to readers just how
similar he is to the detective. First of all, these men seem to come from comparable
backgrounds. True, we know very little about Holmes’ childhood, or even about his family.
In fact, Watson is utterly shocked to discover the existence of Mycroft (Doyle CSH 435). But
one can assume, based on the fact that Mycroft is an important member of government and
that both were obviously well-educated, that the Holmes boys were born into a fairly
comfortable family. The same is the case for Moriarty (and perhaps two other brothers,
also named James; the canon is unclear in this regard). In his description of Moriarty,
Holmes mentions that he is “of good birth and excellent education” (Doyle CSH 470).
Perhaps this would not be a surprising similarity if it were not for the previously
mentioned fact that Moriarty’s criminal tendencies are viewed as hereditary. Along with
the notion that criminals displayed certain physical features, the Victorian era also had
certain ideas about what became known as “the criminal class”. In an article in the Journal
of British Studies entitled “Identity, Language, and Resistance in the Making of the Victorian
‘Criminal Class’: Mayhew’s Convict Revisited,” A.L. Beier defines this class of person:

99
There is widespread agreement that the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries saw the articulation of a concept of a “criminal class” – a group of
offenders allegedly drawn to crime because of moral degeneracy rather than being
drawn to it by their material circumstances. They were “the marginal people among
the urban poor – the vagrants, street-folk, prostitutes, and thieves,” and they were
perceived to constitute “the main danger to the social and moral order” in the
period. (Beier 1)
The so-called “criminal class” is directly related to a certain kind of people: degenerates,
people living on the fringes of society who turn to a life of crime. It would not be at all
uncommon to find a man living on the street who turned into a pickpocket, or a woman
turned into a prostitute. But a man of good birth, a professor who becomes the head of a
massive crime organization? That is little more unheard of, and something that sets
Moriarty apart. Which leads us to ask many questions, including, how a man can be
considered to be of good birth while also having a hereditary criminal strain in his blood?
But what is important here is that Holmes and Moriarty seem to be from the same stock,
despite all evidence that such a thing should be rare. Men of good breeding should not
become the Napoleons of crime. The fact that Moriarty does shows that the path is possible.
This is not to say that a high class or educated criminal was unheard of at the time.
Five years before Doyle published “The Final Problem,” London was gripped by fear. From
August to November of that year, a man known only as Jack the Ripper brutally murdered
at least five women of ill repute. These murders took place in the Whitechapel district, a
part of London’s East End. The East End held a fascination for the higher classes of London
because it was known to be full of criminals – prostitutes, thieves, and murderers. Given

100
the nature of his victims, it would be easy to assume that Jack the Ripper was of a similar
ilk. Yet, speculation about the Ripper’s identity told a different story. One thing that made
the Ripper’s crimes so horrific was the fact that he removed organs from his victims. While
brutal and crude, the precision with which these organs were removed strongly implied
that the killer had a background in medical education. According to casebook.org, a site
devoted to the mystery surrounding Jack the Ripper, there was strong speculation that a
member of the royal family might have even been the killer:
Prince Albert Victor Christian Edward (known as “Eddy” to his friends) is one of the
most famous suspects in the Jack the Ripper case, figuring in no less than three
major theories. (http://www.casebook.org/suspects/eddy.html)
The prince’s involvement has since been rethought, but the fact remains that it seemed
perfectly possible that an educated man or even a very high-class man could be a serial
killer. In the case of Jack the Ripper, we see crimes being committed in the “bad” part of
town. But we also see the strong possibility that the criminal may come from the better
parts of society. So it is not such a huge stretch to believe that an educated and upper class
man like Moriarty might become the greatest criminal of all time.
Earlier, it was mentioned that Moriarty should possess the facial features of a
criminal; the tendency for crime is in his blood and should be written on his face. Yet, when
we finally get a physical description of Moriarty from Holmes, something strange is going
on:
His appearance was quite familiar to me. He is extremely tall and thin, his forehead
domes out in a white curve, and his two eyes are deeply sunken in his head. He is
clean-shaven, pale, and ascetic-looking, retaining something of the professor in his

101
features. His shoulders are rounded from much study, and his face protrudes
forward and is forever slowly oscillating from side to side in a curiously reptilian
fashion. (Doyle CSH 472)
When Moriarty first shows up at Holmes’ flat, the detective appears to practicing his own
physiognomy. That first line in particular is striking, because Moriarty’s appearance is
familiar to us as well:
His very person and appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most
casual observer. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessively lean that he
seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharp and piercing, save during
those intervals of torpor to which I have alluded; and his thin, hawk-like nose gave
his whole expression an air of alertness and decision. (Doyle CSH 20)
We have heard a similar physical description when Watson described Holmes. Is that why
Moriarty’s appearance is familiar to Holmes? Both men are tall and thin, and both have
eyes of note, one sharp, the other sunken. Then, we have the fact that Moriarty is compared
to a reptile where Holmes is frequently referred to as being hawk-like. Hawks eat snakes,
snakes eat eggs. Even in their physical forms, the two men are set up as worthy adversaries,
down to a natural level. The fact that Holmes and Moriarty look so similar and that
Moriarty is believed to be a genetically pre-disposed criminal connects these men in a
bizarre and rather unsavory way.
It is possible that Doyle is alluding to the Victorian notion of “the double”. This idea
had to do with the belief that out there in the world exists another person who looks just
like you but acts very differently. More often than not, this doppelganger would be an evil
version of its reflection. This concept is taken to its extreme in Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and

102
Mr. Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson. In that story, the good and evil side of the personality
existed within one man, Henry Jekyll. By using a formula, he was able to have his evil side
manifest in a completely different personality. In his statement about the events, Jekyll
writes:
Even as good shone upon the countenance of the one, evil was written broadly and
plainly on the face of the other…And yet when I looked upon that ugly idol in the
glass, I was conscious of no repugnance, rather a leap of welcome. This, too, was
myself. It seemed natural and human…This, as I take it, was because all human
beings, as we meet them, are commingled out of good and evil. (Stevenson 51)
Even though Hyde simply looks evil, Jekyll is able to recognize something of himself in
Hyde’s face. In doing so, he acknowledges that all men have the potential to be good or evil.
This idea of the double seems to apply to Holmes and Moriarty. Since these two men look
so alike but exist on completely different sides of the law – at least superficially – it would
make sense for them to be two sides of the same coin. But perhaps it is not so cut and dry.
Yes, the men look alike - but that alone does not mean the hero is just like the villain.
After all, Moriarty is a man who spins a web full of criminal activity and has a network of
shady characters. Then again, so does Holmes. Early on in the canon, in The Sign of Four,
readers are introduced to Holmes’ Baker Street Irregulars. Watson describes their arrival
as “a swift pattering of naked feet upon the stairs,” and the boys in question as “a dozen
dirty and ragged little street Arabs” with a leader who “stood forward with an air of
lounging superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable little scarecrow” (Doyle
CSH 126) “Dirty,” “ragged,” “disreputable” – these are the words Watson uses to describe a
group of boys whom Holmes frequently employs for help on cases. In order to catch

103
criminals, Holmes has no qualms about engaging the assistance of poor little boys who, by
Victorian standards, seem to be one step away from thieves themselves. To a man like
Holmes, who does not recognize traditional social values and mores, people are people.
Little ragged street urchins are as valuable a resource as any when seeking clues. Similarly,
a woman like Irene Adler is not to be dismissed simply because of her gender. Holmes does
not seem to distinguish between his class and gender and that of others – it is simply him
and everyone else. In that way, he finds himself interacting with “disreputable” figures
similar to the ones we can presume Moriarty hires to do his dirty work.
The similarities do not stop there. We also might point to the chosen disciplines of
the men- math and science - and assume that they show us a disparity in the way they
reason; yet their ways of thinking are virtually identical. Holmes describes Moriarty as “a
genius, a philosopher, and abstract thinker” - adjectives that could be applied to Holmes as
well (Doyle CSH 471). Both men think very far outside the box, and have no issue with
doing things that no other person would ever imagine. Moriarty sits in the center of his web
and commands the carrying out of various types of heinousness; however, in his own way,
Holmes says and does all manner of unseemly things. In “The Adventure of Charles
Augustus Milverton,” Holmes woos and becomes engaged to Milverton’s housemaid simply
so that he can obtain information about the blackmailer (Doyle CSH 575-76). In “The
Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle.” Holmes and Watson decide not to tell the police about a
jewel thief (Doyle CSH 257). On many occasions, Holmes places himself outside the
jurisdiction of the police. He may consult for them, but he is not one of them, and is
therefore not restricted by their rules. And a man without rules can easily turn into a man
who fancies himself so above the law that he will never be convicted of any crime, like

104
Moriarty. This potential for Holmes to become an amazing criminal does not go unnoticed
by his companion, who writes:
So swift, silent, and furtive were his movements, like those of a trained bloodhound
picking out a scent, that I could not but think what a terrible criminal he would have
made had he turned his energy and sagacity against the law instead of exerting them
in its defence. (Doyle CSH 112)
Watson sees what a small step it would take for Holmes to become the most brilliant of
wrongdoers. It is purely by choice that Holmes is not giving Moriarty competition for the
title of London’s most illustrious criminal mastermind. But, reading Watson’s thoughts, one
cannot help but imagine what it would be like to have Holmes as a bad guy – and that
seems to be where Moriarty fits in: he is the “evil twin” to Holmes’ “good twin”. When
Watson asks what Moriarty’s next move will be as they head to Switzerland, Holmes tells
him that he will do “what I [Holmes] should do” (Doyle CSH 476). Holmes is able to predict
Moriarty’s every single move simply because they are the actions he himself would take.
When we think of Holmes, Watson’s name naturally follows. Holmes is a man with a
singular companion who works by his side. In “The Final Problem,” Moriarty has no
equivalent to Watson. When Holmes is revealed to have survived at Reichenbach in “The
Adventure of the Empty House”, Moriarty’s sidekick suddenly appears within the canon:
Colonel Sebastian Moran. The man in question is caught trying to assassinate Holmes after
committing another high profile murder. After the police take him into custody, Holmes
and Watson discuss Moran, the latter expressing shock that Moran’s “career is that of an
honourable soldier” (Doyle CSH 494). Holmes creates a metaphor for good men gone bad –
“There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain height. And then suddenly develop

105
some unsightly eccentricity” (Doyle CSH 494). This belief that a man can show signs of
honor, but then have undesirable qualities emerge parallels Moriarty’s being born into a
good family yet being unable to resist his hereditary criminality. It makes sense, then, that
Moran gets picked up by Moriarty and acts as his “chief of the staff” (Doyle CSH 494). We
have an accomplished military man who crosses paths with the most brilliant criminal in
all of London: Moran is Moriarty’s Watson. He is the soldier, the brawn, while Moriarty is
the brains. Other authors have explored this parallelism. In the novel Moriarty of the
d’Urbervilles, for example, Kim Newman re-imagines the famous cases but from the other
side of the moral line, with Sebastian Moran serving as narrator. Even more striking, in my
opinion, is a short story by Neil Gaiman entitled “A Study in Emerald”32. The story begins:
I had been in need of lodgings. That was how I met him. I wanted someone to share
the cost of rooms with me. We were introduced by a mutual acquaintance, in the
chemical laboratories of St. Bart’s. “You’ve been in Afghanistan, I perceive,” that was
what he said to me, and my mouth fell open and my eyes opened very wide. (Gaiman
1)
The narrator goes on to express shock at the deduction, and the new acquaintance explains
just how he did it. This opening scene and the following story read just like A Study in
Scarlet33. The characters are never named, but the interactions perfectly match those
between the newly acquainted Holmes and Watson. Yet, at a certain point, the narrator’s
detective friend describes the murderers they are looking for as “a tall man and a limping
doctor” (Gaiman 19). Suddenly, everything is thrown into question: those suspects sound
an awful lot like Holmes and Watson. If they are Holmes and Watson, whom have we been
32
33

Found in the collection Fragile Things
With some alien overlords thrown in.

106
following throughout the story? That question is answered when our mysterious narrator
signs off at the story’s end with the initials “S.M”. Just like that, the reader realizes that they
have been rooting for Moriarty and Moran to solve the case. Of course, this story is not a
part of Doyle’s canon, and perhaps not how Moriarty and Moran met. However, what
Gaiman does with this story is show us just how similar the two pairs are: the soldier and
genius, the brawn and the brains, the biographer and the subject.
Sherlock Holmes might have been outfoxed by Irene Adler and he might not have
successfully protected some of his clients34, but only one figure ever proves an equal match
for him. When Holmes describes Moriarty to Watson, it is with a tone of appreciation, even
respect. He says, “…I was forced to confess that I had at last met an antagonist who was my
intellectual equal. My horror at his crimes was lost in my admiration at his skill” (Doyle CSH
471). The fact that Holmes considers Moriarty to be his “intellectual equal” is high praise
from a man who presumes himself to be a superior brain to all others around him.
Whenever he speaks of Moriarty after the incident at the Falls, the man is always used as a
bar against which to measure other adversaries. In “The Adventure of the Illustrious
Client”, Holmes tells said client “If your man is more dangerous than the late Professor
Moriarty, or than the living Colonel Sebastian Moran, then he is indeed worth meeting”
(Doyle CSH 985). Moriarty and even Moran become the most dangerous men in the world
to Holmes. In fact, he remarks that, “London has become a singularly uninteresting city
since the death of the late lamented Professor Moriarty” (Doyle CSH 496). Holmes actually
mourns the loss of such a criminal. Perhaps this is because having him perish was a much
less satisfying ending to their saga than being able to put the man behind bars. In any case,

34

For example, “The Five Orange Pips” and “The Valley of Fear”.

107
there is something about this man that makes him the most interesting and worthy
adversary Holmes ever encounters. Even when Watson is imagining how their final
confrontation played out at Reichenbach Falls, he acknowledges that “it ended, as it could
hardly fail to end in such a situation, in their reeling over, locked in each other’s arms…the
most dangerous criminal and the foremost champion of the law of their generation” (Doyle
CSH 480). “The Final Problem” is full of intimations that, to quote Harry Potter, “neither can
live while the other survives.”35 They must both go down together over those falls. The only
way Holmes’ survival can be explained is by the fact that Moriarty suddenly goes against
every aspect of his character. In “The Adventure of the Empty House” Holmes explains that
“he [Moriarty] drew no weapon, but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me”
(Doyle CSH 486). Moriarty was a man who always thought things through, just like Holmes;
but, in that moment, he simply acted on animal instinct and tackled Holmes. He was
supposed to die with Holmes, not on his own because he acted on an impulse. If people had
not protested the death of Sherlock Holmes so vehemently, the greatest detective would
have perished, entwined with the darker version of himself, the yin to his crime-fighting
yang. That, indeed, would have been poetic justice, if unpopular with fans. Instead, because
master criminals are timeless, we see Moriarty adapted alongside Holmes in television
shows where it is still a possibility that the men will destroy each other.

BBC’s Sherlock: The Thin Line Between the Psychopath and Sociopath
The first season of Sherlock leads up to the meeting between Sherlock and Moriarty.
In ”A Study in Pink”, a murderous cabbie reveals the name of the man who hired him:

35

Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix 841

108
Moriarty. In ”The Blind Banker”, a murderous acrobat is seen communicating with her
Moriarty before his sniper takes her out. The name keeps coming up in connection with
crimes, and Sherlock is suitably intrigued at the prospect of meeting such a brilliant
criminal mind. The season finale has Moriarty contacting Sherlock through a series of
hostages and having him solve cases within an allotted amount of time. The episode is
entitled “The Great Game” and it is just that: a battle of wits between Moriarty and
Sherlock. When they finally meet at the end of the episode, it is a tense scene that ends with
their fates, as well as John’s, hanging in the balance. The second season picks up the story
there, with Moriarty opting to forgo the murders of Sherlock and John at the promise of
something better from Irene. Moriarty’s true big moment comes in the second season
finale, “The Reichenbach Fall” – a fitting name, no? – in which he works tirelessly to
completely discredit Sherlock and make the detective kill himself. In the process of the total
takedown, Moriarty ends up being the one to commit a lasting suicide…or so we thought.
The most recent season, three, ended with video screens all over London filling up with
Moriarty’s face, as a voice repeats, “Did you miss me? Did you miss me?” Business between
the detective and the criminal mastermind is apparently far from over. For the purposes of
this chapter, however, we will look only at the existing character of Moriarty and how he
compares to Sherlock, rather than speculating about their real final problem.
The first thing to note when looking at Andrew Scott’s portrayal of James Moriarty is
the fact that his entire relationship with Sherlock seems to be this odd flirtation. The very
first words Moriarty says to Sherlock – through the voice of a hostage – are “Hello, sexy”
quickly followed by “solve my puzzle Sherlock or I’m going to be so naughty” (“The Great
Game” 15:09-15:11 & 16:12-16:14). Though viewers have yet to be introduced to the

109
dominatrix Irene Adler, this speech sounds like something she would say to her clients.
This teasing manner is not something we see within the canon; the BBC adaptation,
however reminds us time and again that it is a different world, and open sexual tension or
flirtation between people of the same-sex is not uncommon. We see it with Sherlock and
John, and in the overwhelming fan tendency to write stories about their perceived romantic
relationship. And, we see it in almost every moment between Sherlock and Moriarty. The
first time Sherlock claps eyes on Moriarty, the villain is posing as Jim from IT at St. Bart’s
Hospital, and Molly Hooper’s new beau. He acts nervous around the great detective as
Sherlock continues to search for clues to solve Moriarty’s first puzzle. When Sherlock looks
at “Jim,” he says one word – “gay”. After Jim leaves and Molly demands an explanation,
Sherlock points to the product in Jim’s hair, his colorful and obvious underwear, and the
fact that he left his number for Sherlock himself. When Sherlock later meets Moriarty as
Moriarty, the latter mentions how fun it was “playing gay.” But is he playing? Or, as we
discover with Irene, is he just unable to hide his true attraction? He may have been
pretending to be gay to throw Sherlock off-guard, but even when he unmasks himself, the
flirting is still there. The final showdown at the end of the first season takes place in the
pool of a high school, the site of the first murder Moriarty had Sherlock investigate. When
he comes face to face with the detective, Moriarty asks,” Is that a British army Browning
L9A1 in your pocket, or are you just pleased to see me?” to which Sherlock replies, “Both”
(“The Great Game” 1:22:00-1:22:09). Moriarty uses a classic line36, and Sherlock gives as
good as he gets. Their rapport is based around this idea of mutual attraction. Regardless of
36

The line “is that a pistol in your pocket or are you just glad to see me” is supposed to have
been said by Mae West in She Done Him Wrong (1933). But according to filmsite.org, she
did not say it in the film but instead to an L.A. police officer acting as her escort from the
train station in 1936.

110
whether there is a physical or sexual attraction between the two men, one thing is
undeniable: in the words of Sherlock, when he acts as witness against Moriarty, they have a
“special something”: “We met twice, five minutes in total. I pulled a gun and he tried to
blow me up I felt we had a special something” (“The Reichenbach Fall” 16:36-16:39). Their
admiration for and attraction to one another seems to stem from the well-matched danger
each represents to the other. They are locked in a fight to the death, and every minute of it
is intriguing.
Before getting to what makes Moriarty and Sherlock so similar in this incarnation
first we look at what makes them different – in this case, the difference between
“sociopath” and “psychopath”. In the very first episode of Sherlock, this exchange takes
place:
Anderson: …and we found it in the hands of our favorite psychopath.
Sherlock: I’m not a psychopath, Anderson. I’m a high-functioning sociopath. Do your
research. (“A Study in Pink” 57:50-57:56)
These terms are often misunderstood as synonyms, with “psychopath” often having a
worse connotation, thanks to characters like Norman Bates. There is, however, an
important distinction between the two. In an article entitled “What’s the Difference
Between A Sociopath And A Psychopath? (Not Much, But One Might Kill You)”, Chris Weller
attempts to articulate the difference between these terms:
Both tend to be charming, despite being unable to empathize normally with others.
They offer convincing systems of fear and disgust, but tend to lack both. Here’s the
crux, though: Psychopaths cross the line. Sociopaths may hole up in their houses and
remove themselves from society, while a psychopath is busy in his basement rigging

111
shackles to his furnace. Psychopaths are dangerous. They’re violent and cruel, and
oftentimes downright sinister. (Weller)
Sherlock proves how charming he is by the fact that he is able to manipulate women like
Molly Hooper into helping him with tasks. But the tendency to lean towards antisocial
behavior is even clearer proof of his sociopathic nature. He seems perfectly content to
work alone, though he is better with John. More to the point, he often exhibits antisocial
behavior in the form of saying inappropriate and hurtful things, whether intentionally or
not. For example, when he explains to Molly why Jim from IT is clearly gay, Sherlock
genuinely does not understand that what he is saying might be unfeeling. When she leaves,
clearly upset, John admonishes Sherlock for being callous, and Sherlock is confused:
Sherlock: Just saving her time. Isn’t that kinder?
John: That? No, no Sherlock that wasn’t kind. (“The Great Game” 19:48-19:51)
Time and again, we see Sherlock turn to John for social cues. He is a very brilliant man in
many ways, but understanding basic human nature is not one of them. In this way, he often
comes off as cruel – but, as he is quick to point out to Anderson, what he is not is a
psychopath. That term brings violence into the mix. If Sherlock is a high-functioning
sociopath, then Moriarty seems to be his psychopathic counterpart.
When playing his “game” with Sherlock, Moriarty has absolutely no compulsions
about taking a blind old woman or a little boy hostage if it will make Sherlock dance. He
also has no problems killing said old woman and eleven others when she begins to describe
him (“The Great Game” 48:10). The interaction between Sherlock and Moriarty at the pool
illustrates their difference quite clearly:
Sherlock: People have died.

112
Moriarty: That’s what people DO! (“The Great Game” 1:24:08-1:24:10)
Sherlock may not understand how to interact politely with “ordinary people,” but he values
their lives; Moriarty, on the other hand, sees no problem with wasting them. In the very
beginning of the second season, he threatens to skin someone and turn them into shoes (“A
Scandal in Belgravia” 2:14-2:22). We most clearly see the difference between the
sociopathic Sherlock and the psychopathic Moriarty when looking at Moriarty’s quest to
discredit Sherlock. In “The Reichenbach Fall,” Moriarty plants the seed into people’s heads
that Sherlock might just be a fraud. He pinpoints Sally Donovan and Anderson as the ones
who will first begin to doubt, since they have a shared animosity against Sherlock, and a
belief that, one day, he might become dangerous. Moriarty knows how simple it would be
to tip them over into believing that Sherlock is a fake. He understands people, and that
allows him to do things such as manipulate an entire jury to ensure that he is not arrested
for several high profile break-ins. Moriarty can be charming to people, he just does not care
about them. His disregard for human lives makes him dangerous. On the other hand
Sherlock does not empathize with people at all, but he will try to save them.
Moriarty’s psychopathic tendencies do not preclude him from being civilized, like
Doyle’s original creation. As he stands, ready to kill Sherlock and John at the start of the
second season, Moriarty’s phone begins to ring, and he asks, “Do you mind if get that?” as
his BeeGees ringtone echoes around the pool (“A Scandal in Belgravia” 1:52). He might be a
massively powerful criminal who will stop at nothing to ruin Sherlock, but he always minds
his manners. Even when he is carrying out his break-in at the Tower of London, he does so
like another well-known “civilized psychopath.” Moriarty puts in his earbuds and dances
around the room containing the crown jewels, before breaking the glass and climbing onto

113
the throne while the music crescendos. This immediately brings to mind an iconic film
scene from Stanley Kubrick’s 1971 adaptation of A Clockwork Orange, where viewers see
the protagonist/antagonist,37 Alex, savagely beat a man and his wife, destroy their home,
and prepare to rape the woman, all while singing “Singin’ in the Rain”. (A Clockwork Orange
11:12-13:17). Alex and Moriarty may be criminals and they may be violent and dangerous,
but they are not without culture; they can appreciate the finer things in life like a
symphony or a musical.
Just as in Doyle’s original story, the BBC’s Sherlock and Moriarty are actually more
alike than different. While these similarities are mentioned and made clear in the canon,
the television show makes them crucial to all interactions between the two. First of all, we
have the idea that Moriarty has been a part of Sherlock’s life and career for a very long
time. The first puzzle Moriarty gives to Sherlock involves solving the murder of a schoolboy
named Carl Powers. His death occurred while Sherlock himself was in school, and inspired
the young Holmes to become a detective when he realized that there had to be more to the
case than the police realized. When he solves Carl’s murder in the present day, Moriarty’s
message via hostage involves him saying:
Clever you, guessing about Carl Powers. I never liked him. Carl laughed at me, so I
stopped him laughing. (“The Great Game” 28:40-28:52)
This strongly implies that it was Moriarty who killed Carl, or that he facilitated it somehow
for someone that Carl was mocking. Either way, Moriarty and Sherlock have been on
opposite sides of the law since they were young. Their similarities are put into more
concrete language when the men meet at the pool. Moriarty informs Sherlock that he is “a

37

He may be the main character and narrator but he is also an ultraviolent psychopath.

114
specialist, like you” and Sherlock refers to him as a “consulting criminal” (“The Great Game”
1:22:55 & 1:23:15). The consulting criminal and the consulting detective, they are unique
personalities within their fields. Presumably, Moriarty is one-of-a-kind, just like Sherlock,
and, with their opposing careers, they seem to complete each other. Moriarty harps on this
idea when he visits Sherlock at 221B Baker Street after his acquittal in the robbery trial:
Every fairy tale needs a good old-fashioned villain. You need me or you’re nothing.
Because we’re just alike, you and I, except you’re boring. You’re on the side of the
angels. (“The Reichenbach Fall” 22:39-22:54)
In Moriarty’s eyes, what must make life as a hero bearable is having a good villain to work
against - and, having your opponent be your equal in every way makes for a more thrilling
adventure. Sherlock knows this, but he also knows that it is not simply black and white
when it comes to him and Moriarty. Even yin and yang have a small circle of the opposite
within them. Moriarty thinks Sherlock is boring because he fights for the law, but this
Sherlock is not a purely good man, and he himself knows it.
When they end up on top of the modern-day equivalent of Reichenbach Falls – the
roof of St. Bart’s – Sherlock proves how similar he is to Moriarty:
I am you, prepared to do anything. Prepared to burn. Prepared to do what ordinary
people won’t do. You want me to shake hands with you in hell? I shall not disappoint
you…oh I may be on the side of the angels, but don’t think for one sssecond that I am
one of them. (“The Reichenbach Fall” 1:15:35-1:15:48 & 1:16:04-1:16:11)
Standing on that rooftop, Sherlock acknowledges what Moriarty has been trying to get out
of him all along: they are the same. Sherlock may help the police and “be on the side of the
angels” but there is a darkness to him. He is willing to do anything to succeed in his

115
endeavors; this lack of inhibition aids him as he helps New Scotland Yard, but it also makes
him more like Moriarty. Even the way he hisses his “sssecond” is a connection between the
two. Just as Doyle’s Moriarty is described as “reptilian,” the BBC’s villain has a similar coldbloodedness about him as well: when he is threatening to make shoes out of his associate,
he says, “say that again and know that if you’re lying to me, I will find you and I will ssskin
you” (“A Scandal in Belgravia” 2:14-2:22). Sherlock and Moriarty share mannerisms, and
they share an ability to do what others would never think of without repenting. Perhaps the
only difference is that Sherlock has John as a moral compass. But even this relationship is
something Moriarty points to as a similarity between him and Sherlock. As they sit drinking
their tea in Sherlock’s flat, Moriarty muses “Aren’t ordinary people adorable? Well, you
know. You’ve got John. I should get myself a live-in one” (“The Reichenbach Fall” 25:1625:25). John is Sherlock’s tie to humanity, but Moriarty sees him as pet, a plaything, and
assumes that Sherlock feels the same. In this way, he tries to relate himself even more to
Sherlock.
This somehow works. The final appearance Moriarty makes in the series thus far –
barring his city-wide digital return – is within Sherlock’s mind. When Sherlock has been
shot38 in the season three finale, the people in his life make appearances in his mind palace
to help him survive the injury. Molly Hooper provides medical advice, and Mycroft tries to
goad his younger brother back to life. But Moriarty is there as well; chained up and in a
straitjacket, he yells in Sherlock’s agonized face and taunts him.
Sherlock: Why did you never feel pain?

38

By John’s wife. This Mary Morstan is decidedly more complex than Doyle’s character.

116
Moriarty: You always feel it, Sherlock. but you don’t have to fear it. Pain, heartbreak,
loss, death, it’s all good. It’s all good….you’re going to love being dead Sherlock. No
one ever bothers you. Ah, Mrs. Hudson will cry and mummy and daddy will cry and
the woman will cry. And John will cry buckets and buckets. It’s him I worry about
the most. That wife * pfft * You’re letting him down, Sherlock. John Watson is
definitely in danger. (“His Last Vow” 38:40-40:28)
In this exchange, the psychopath tries to humanize the sociopath by pointing out that these
horrible things are all a part of life. And then, Moriarty begins to taunt Sherlock with the list
of people he will leave heartbroken if he dies. It is goading, it is nudging – and it works.
Hearing that John will be in danger without him galvanizes Sherlock and he wakes up in the
hospital, despite the odds not being in his favor for survival. It is his nemesis who jolts
Sherlock awake. However, something darker seems to be at play here. A tumblr post by
username “theprofessorstrikesagain” compiles clips of this exchange and adds a caption:
OKAY, CAN WE TALK ABOUT THIS FOR A SECOND?
Moriarty is in Sherlock’s Mind Palace. CHAINED UP, IN SHERLOCK’S BLOODY MIND
PALACE.
Not only did Sherlock fully accept the whole “I am you” “You’re me” conversation
that they had, he recognizes it IN HIMSELF that there is a part of him that truly is
Moriarty.
AND HE CHAINED IT UP.
This tumblr user is exploring the implications of Moriarty’s location in Sherlock’s mind. His
padded room and straitjacket and chains at first glance look like a form of punishment. But
“theprofessorstrikesagain” suggests that it is instead restraint, and it represents Sherlock

117
keeping the darker side of his personality in check. He recognizes how similar he is to
Moriarty, and how easy it would be for him to become just as dangerous. So Sherlock locks
that facet of his personality up tight and far away in the deep recesses of his mind. Doyle’s
Holmes and Moriarty might have represented the idea of the double, but Sherlock’s
nemeses literally become one by this point in the series. And that emerges from the fact
that this Sherlock starts out much more aware of just how similar he is to James Moriarty.
And the fact that they seem to have unfinished business suggests that we might finally get
that adaptation where they achieve mutually assured destruction. The timelessness of the
figures means their battle can take place today and have a different outcome than Doyle’s
canon.

CBS’s Elementary: “As If Men Had A Monopoly On Murder”
On Elementary, it is revealed towards the end of the first season that Irene Adler and
Moriarty are one and the same. Sherlock spent so much time thinking the love of his life –
Irene – had been killed by his nemesis – Moriarty – only to be proven very, very wrong. It
may seem as though this female Moriarty would not have too much in common with
Sherlock, but surprisingly enough, they still share some traits.
That being said, the most important thing to pay attention to when looking at
Natalie Dormer’s Jamie Moriarty is the fact that she is a woman. Throughout the first
season, there is an unspoken assumption that the person orchestrating murders and crimes
must be a man. Moriarty’s henchmen are even surprised to discover the truth. When she
finally reveals her identity to Sherlock, Moriarty also explains why she had a man pretend
to be her on the phone earlier. It appears that some people might have a problem with their

118
boss or criminal mastermind being a woman. Moriarty laughs this off by saying “as if men
had a monopoly on murder” (“Heroine” 43:55). We have certainly come a long way since
Doyle’s Watson questioned whether Irene needed protecting from accidentally committing
a crime. This Irene/Moriarty knows she is every bit as good as a man in her shoes. This
Moriarty is recognizable as an adaptation of Doyle’s creation because of her complete
disregard for the law. But in updating that character, we see Elementary acknowledging the
fact that in this day, anything a man can do, a woman can do as well. The fact that she is a
woman makes Moriarty’s interactions with Watson interesting, as that character was also
gender swapped in this incarnation. Always the civil criminal mastermind, Jamie Moriarty
manages to get Watson away from Sherlock and takes her to a nice restaurant for lunch.
While sitting in a room full of people, she tries to figure Watson out and assumes that
Sherlock’s companion wants to sleep with him. This dynamic takes on a potentially jealous
school-girl vibe when the possibility that both women might want Sherlock arises. In fact,
this idea of wanting Sherlock will come back to royally bollix Moriarty’s plans.
Before Moriarty’s identity is revealed, Sherlock begins to suspect Irene might be
working for Moriarty. He notices a change in her birthmarks from the time when they were
lovers and accuses her of removing a mark to disguise herself. As he yells at her, Irene tries
to hurt him by comparing him to the very “man” he hates so much:
You know, it’s funny. I close my eyes and I try to picture him [Moriarty], and I see
someone an awful lot like you. I think you do too. I think if he weren’t so bent on
being your enemy, he’d be your friend. (“The Woman” 40:13-40:30)
She appears to be using this to try and insult him; once we know that she is Moriarty, it
takes on a different meaning. Even once she has revealed her true colors, she still compares

119
the two of them, but this time as a kind of compliment. When talking of their first meeting,
she mentions that she orchestrated it because he had gotten in the way of several of her
planned assassinations. Then she says:
My first instinct was to kill you. Quietly. Discreetly. But then the more I learned
about you, the more curious I became. Here at last seemed to be a mind that rivaled
my own. Something too complicated and too beautiful to destroy, at least without
further analysis. So I devised a way to study you in your own environment.
(“Heroine” 44:33-45:05)
In the canon and on Sherlock, we see Holmes getting excited at the prospect of finally
having someone who can equal him intellectually. This time, it is Moriarty who is
expressing that delight – at least, at first. Sherlock would be a scientific investigation, a
chance to explore the complexity and beauty of a mind like her own. When Sherlock denies
that they have anything in common, she pityingly says, “I understand why you would think
so. I know how much pride you take in your uniqueness” (“Heroine” 45:25-45:27). Sherlock
is a character that is pleased by the fact that he is different and that he is superior to others.
But Moriarty puts them on the same level by pointing out how very similar they are to one
another. Sherlock reinforces her point later when he revels in the fact that she betrayed
him. Rather than being completely devastated, like everyone expects him to be, he is
invigorated by the prospect of having a worthy adversary. He tells a detective on the force
“Well, I’ve never had a nemesis before. I mean, not a proper one. Quite looking forward to
it. I imagine it to be tremendously energizing” (“Heroine” 54:35-54:40). Whether he likes it
or not at the start, Sherlock certainly begins to embrace the idea that he is not the only one

120
like himself. Having an intellectual equal to work against intrigues him and makes him
excited for the future.
Unfortunately, Moriarty and Sherlock do not get to spend that much time playing
their “game.” The way Moriarty is brought down at the end of the first season brings
together the two most important aspects of her character: her gender and her similarity to
Sherlock. Moriarty’s plan for this finale is to makes sure that Macedonia does not join the
European Union, and thereby render all of her Macedonian denars worthless. If she
succeeded in her plan, she stood to make billions of dollars. It looked like she was going to
win. She had kidnapped the daughter of a former smuggler, forcing his hand in the
assassination of a diplomat’s son, then had the assassin killed. Amid the uproar, she became
a very rich woman – that is, until Sherlock became so distraught at having been outsmarted
that he overdosed on painkillers. Moriarty visits him in the hospital and tries to get him to
run away with her. She once again highlights their compatibility by saying that she never
predicted Irene’s “death” would send him into addiction – “Well, you surprised me. You’re
the only person on the planet who can” (“Heroine” 1:21:03-1:21:10). And Sherlock
suddenly agrees with her belief that they are the same:
Well, you know, we are the same, you and I. We both made the same mistake. We fell
in love. It made us stupid. (“Heroine” 1:22:10-1:22:15)
Sherlock admits that he had made a mistake in falling for Irene, when she would cause him
the most horrific heartache, and then turn out to be his greatest enemy. But Irene fails to
see how her loving Sherlock made her in any way stupid. He explains:
You know, she solved you. The mascot. Watson. She diagnosed your condition
earlier this evening. She realized the real reason that you could never quite bring

121
yourself to kill me. The reason you came back into my life. The reason you came
here. (“Heroine” 1:22:36-1:22:53)
Upon first watching the show, I assumed that “condition” meant Moriarty was pregnant.
Though the timeline did not lend itself to this idea, it seemed the only answer. But Sherlock
is describing her love for him as a condition, an illness. His love for Irene caused his life to
break apart when he lost her, but it also eventually brought him to Watson. Irene’s love
appears to be only a weakness, and the cause of her downfall. It turns out Sherlock had
faked the overdose because Watson knew Irene would come to his side and they could
catch her. This one scene manages to connect Sherlock and Moriarty perfectly, while also
making them seem miles apart. They are both intelligent people who will do whatever it
takes to get what they want or need. They also are both people who are not above feelings
or falling in love. But, at the end of the day, her love proves her complete undoing, while his
ultimately made him stronger than ever with a companion by his side. The viewer is left
wondering: is her weakness brought on by the fact that she is a woman in love, or is it that
she is not really his complete equal despite what she may think? Either way, this
incarnation manages to present a Sherlock and Moriarty that are similar to each other, like
their predecessors, but also vastly different in a way that seems to be linked to the decision
to gender swap.

122

Conclusion
The Final Problem
“It is with a heavy heart that I take up my pen to write these last words…”
(Doyle “The Final Problem”)

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle created a bit of an immortal being when he first wrote about
Sherlock Holmes. Not just in the sense that Holmes would prove to be very difficult to kill
off, but also because he and certain characters from his world would become incredibly
important cultural figures. In terms of numbers of adaptations, Doyle’s canon is up there
with the likes of William Shakespeare’s plays and Jane Austen’s novels. But there is one
crucial difference. When Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice is adapted into a film it is either
set in the time it was written or adapted so thoroughly that it only bears a passing
resemblance to the original. For example, the film Bridget Jones’ Diary has an outspoken
single woman choosing between the rich handsome man – who is also quite the cad – and
the seemingly standoffish and snobbish man – who turns out to the one. But the characters
are not dancing country dances, instead they are getting drunk and smoking cigarettes at
Tarts and Vicars parties. This intense adaptation is because Austen’s novels are so defined
by their setting, with the very strict social customs. The same is seen with adaptations of
Shakespeare39. A play like Hamlet really has to be set in the time it was meant. When it was
adapted into a film with Ethan Hawke, Hamlet 2000, viewers saw Claudius murdering his
brother for control of the Elsinore Company. The stakes for revenge are just not as high
when a kingdom is not on the line. But Sherlock Holmes is able to fit effortlessly into any

39

Well, usually not the Tarts and Vicars, but sometimes.

123
time or place. It does not give viewers or readers a moment’s pause when the detective is
sleuthing around modern London or fighting robots in the twenty-second century. This is
because Holmes is not a direct reflection of the time in which he was created. The qualities
that define him are internal and clear. Also, he is a kind of heroic figure unlike any that
came before him. He contains aspects of Thomas Carlyle’s “Great Man”, but he is not
restricted to that one heroic type. We see this Sherlock and Elementary and any other
adaptation.
The endurance also applies to John Watson, Irene Adler, and James Moriarty. These
three characters have no concrete ties to their original Victorian England setting, but they
all have strong ties to Holmes. Watson is definable by his internal qualities of morality and
bravery as well as his medical profession. A man who has recently returned from war and
life out in the world, Watson can easily be uprooted. He may get married in the canon, but
his strongest tie is with the man who seems to complete him – Holmes. Like Holmes, he is a
new way of looking at a heroic trope – though at first glace he appears to be a sidekick,
their partnership is more complicated than that. The same is true for Irene Adler who is no
more the typical version of a hero’s woman than Watson is a sidekick. Even in the Victorian
era, she was a modern woman. Adaptations today still see her pushing the envelope of
what is expected of women in the modern age. These expectations may change, but the fact
that she always finds a way of besting Holmes does not. And finally, Moriarty is so much
more than a cut and dry villain. He is a figure who causes discomfort because of how closely
he resembles Holmes’ hero. And since crime will always pay, Moriarty - with no family and
no regard for any restrictions – will always be there to organize his criminal web. Which

124
means that Holmes will always be there to fight him until the bitter end, however that may
play out.
The fact that we will continue to see Holmes and these specific characters adapted
and re-imagined is something we can count on. There will never be a time when such
timeless figures are no longer applicable. Viewers and readers always have a soft spot for
characters that behave in unexpected ways and defy stereotypes. So, as long as films and
television shows and collections of new stories are being made, these characters will fit in
and generation after generation will realize that this is because Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
created truly timeless heroic characters.

125
Bibliography
Adams, Guy. Sherlock: the Casebook. N.p.: It Books, 2013. Print.
Aldrich, Zoe. "The Adventuress: Lady Audley's Secret as novel, play, and film." The New
Woman and Her Sisters: Feminism and theatre 1850-1914. Ed. Vivien Gardner and
Susan Rutherford. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1992. 159-74. Print.
Aronson, Theo. "Lillie Langtry." Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. N.p.: n.p., n.d. N.
pag. Print.
Beier, A. L. "Identity, Language, and Resistance in the Making of the Victorian 'Criminal
Class': Mayhew's Convict Revisited." Journal of British Studies: n. pag. Print.
Boswell, James. Boswell's Life of Johnson. London: Oxford University Press, 1953. Print.
Bridget Jones's Diary. Dir. Sharon Maguire. 2001. Film.
Bronte, Charlotte. Jane Eyre. New York: W.W Norton and Company, 2001. Print.
Carlyle, Thomas. On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History. Berkley: University of
California Press, 1993. Print.
Casebook: Jack the Ripper. N.p., n.d. Web. 30 Nov. 2014. <http://www.casebook.org/>.
"'Child Predator.'" By Peter Blake. Dir. Rod Holcomb. Episode #3. Elementary. CBS. 18 Oct.
2012. Television.
A Clockwork Orange. Dir. Stanley Kubrick. 1972. Film.
"'Dead Man's Switch.'" By Liz Friedman and Christopher Silber. Dir. Larry Teng. Episode
#20. Elementary. CBS. 25 Apr. 2013. Television.
"'Details.'" By Jeffrey Paul King and Jason Tracey. Dir. Sanaa Hamri. Episode #16.
Elementary. CBS. 14 Feb. 2013. Television.

126
Dirks, Tim. "Greatest Film Mis-Quotes Part 1." AMC filmsite. American Movie Classics
Company LLC, n.d. Web. 30 Nov. 2014. <http://www.filmsite.org/>.
Doyle, Arthur Conan. Arthur Conan Doyle: A Life in Letters. Ed. Jon Lellenberg, Daniel
Stashower, and Charles Foley. New York`: The Penguin Press, 2007. Print.
- - -. The Complete Sherlock Holmes. Garden City: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1930. Print.
Vol. 1 of The Complete Sherlock Holmes. 2 vols.
- - -. The Complete Sherlock Holmes. Garden City: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1930. Print.
Vol. 2 of The Complete Sherlock Holmes. 2 vols.
Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog. Dir. Joss Whedon. 2008. Film.
Gaiman, Neil. "A Study in Emerald." Fragile Things. New york: Harper, 2006. 1-26. Print.
"'The Great Game.'" By Mark Gatiss. Dir. Paul McGuigan. Episode #3. Sherlock. BBC. London,
8 Aug. 2010. Television.
Hamlet 2000. Dir. Michael Almereyda. 2000. Film.
"Heroine." Dir. John Polson. By Robert Doherty and Craig Sweeny. Episode #24. Elementary.
CBS. 16 May 2013. Television.
"'His Last Vow.'" By Steven Moffat. Dir. Nick Hurran. Episode #9. Sherlock. BBC. London, 12
Jan. 2014. Television.
"'The Hounds of Baskerville.'" By Mark Gatiss. Dir. Paul McGuigan. Episode #5. Sherlock.
BBC. London, 8 Jan. 2012. Television.
Hughes, Thomas. Tom Brown's Schooldays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. Print.
I metabolize caffeine into words. N.p., n.d. Web. 30 Nov. 2014.
<http://theprofessorstrikesagain.tumblr.com/post/73168113873/okay-can-wetalk-about-this-for-a-second>.

127
Jamison, Anne. fic: Why Fanfiction is Taking Over the World. Dallas: BenBella Books, Inc.,
2013. Print.
Jones, Jane Clare. "Is Sherlock sexist? Steven Moffat's wanton women." The Guardian 3 Jan.
2012: n. pag. Print.
Kayman, Martin A. "'The short story from Poe to Chesterton.'" The Cambridge Companion to
Crime Fiction. Ed. Martin Priestman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
41-58. Print.
"A Landmark Story." Dir. Peter Werner. By Corinne Brinkerhoff. Episode #21. Elementary.
CBS. 2 May 2013. Television.
Lavigne, Carlen. "The Noble Bachelor and the Crooked Man: Subtext and Sexuality in the
BBC's Sherlock". Sherlock Holmes for the 21st Century: Essays on New Adaptations.
Ed. Lynette Porter. Jefferson and London: McFarland & Company, Inc., 2012. 13-23.
Print.
Lombroso, Cesare. Criminal Man. Trans. Mary Gibson, Nicole Hahn Rafter, and Mark
Seymour. Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2006. Print.
"M." Dir. John Polson. By Robert Doherty. Episode #12. Elementary. CBS. 10 Jan. 2013.
Television.
Marinaro, Francesca M., and Kayley Thomas. "'Don't Make People into Heroes, John':
(Re/De)Constructing the Detective as Hero. Sherlock Holmes for the 21st Century:
Essays for New Adaptations. Ed. Lynette Porter. Jefferson and London: McFarland &
Company, Inc., 2012. 65-80. Print.

128
Marshall, Gail. Cultural formations: the nineteenth-century touring actress and her
international audiences. The Cambridge Companion to the Actress. Ed. Maggie B. Gale
and John Stokes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 52-73. Print.
McLaughlin, Rebecca. (2013). A Study in Sherlock: Revisiting the Relationship Between
Sherlock Holmes and Dr. John Watson. In BSU Honors Program Theses and Projects.
Item 9.
Mumford, Gwilym. "Sherlock returns to the BBC: 'He's definitely devilish.'" The Guardian 16
Dec. 2011: n. pag. Print.
Newman, Kim. "Everything You Need To Know About Professor Moriarty." Sabotage Times.
N.p., n.d. Web. 30 Nov. 2014. <http://sabotagetimes.com/>.
"'One Way to Get Off.'" By Christopher Silber. Dir. Seith Mann. Episode #7. Elementary. CBS.
15 Nov. 2012. Television.
"'Pilot.'" By Robert Doherty. Dir. Michael Cuesta. Episode #1. Elementary. CBS. 27 Sept.
2012. Television.
Porter, Lynette, ed. Sherlock Holmes for the 21st Century: Essays on New Adaptations. N.p.:
McFarland, 2012. Print.
Priestman, Martin, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Crime Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003. Print.
"'The Rat Race.'" By Craig Sweeny. Dir. Rosemary Rodriguez. Episode #4. Elementary. CBS.
25 Oct. 2012. Television.
"'The Reichenbach Fall.'" By Steve Thompson. Dir. Toby Haynes. Episode #6. Sherlock. BBC.
London, 15 Jan. 2012. Television.

129
"Risk Management." Dir. Adam Davidson. By Liz Friedman and Robert Doherty. Episode
#22. Elementary. CBS. 9 May 2013. Television.
Rowling, J. K. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. N.p.: Arthur A. Levine Books, 2003.
Print.
"'A Scandal in Belgravia.'" By Steven Moffat. Dir. Paul McGuigan. Episode #4. Sherlock. BBC.
London, 1 Jan. 2012. Television.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Between Men: English Literature and Homosocial Desire. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1985. Print.
Seymour, Bruce. "Lola Montez." Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. N.p.: n.p., n.d. N.
pag. Print.
Stein, Louisa Ellen, and Kristina Busse, eds. Sherlock and Transmedia Fandom: Essays on the
BBC Series. N.p.: McFarland, 2012. Print.
Stevenson, Robert Louis. Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company, 2003. Print.
Stoker, Bram. Dracula. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1997. Print.
"'A Study in Pink.'" By Steven Moffat. Dir. Paul McGuigan. Episode #1. Sherlock. BBC.
London, 25 July 2010. Television.
Toadvine, April. "The Watson Effect: Civilizing the Sociopath". Sherlock Holmes for the 21st
Century: Essays on New Adaptations. Ed. Lynette Porter. Jefferson and London:
McFarland & Company, Inc., 2012. 48-64. Print.
Tosh, John. A Man's Place: Masculinity and the Middle-Class Home in Victorian England. New
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1999. Print.

130
Weller, Chris. "What's the Difference Between a Sociopath and a Psychopath? (Not Much,
But One Might Kill You)." Medical Daily. IBT Media Inc., n.d. Web. 30 Nov. 2014.
<http://www.medicaldaily.com/>.
"'While You Were Sleeping.'" By Robert Doherty. Dir. John David Coles. Episode #2.
Elementary. CBS. 4 Oct. 2012. Television.
Wills, Chris. "The Story of The Strand." The Strand Magazine. N.p., n.d. Web. 30 Nov. 2014.
<http://www.strandmag.com>.
"The Woman." Dir. Seith Mann. By Robert Doherty and Craig Sweeny. Episode #23.
Elementary. CBS. 16 May 2013. Television.

