Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2012

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2012

Genus Esse Deorum; Infelix Dido
Jacqueline McLean
Bard College

Recommended Citation
McLean, Jacqueline, "Genus Esse Deorum; Infelix Dido" (2012). Senior Projects Spring 2012. Paper 30.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2012/30

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2012 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

Genus Esse Deorum; Infelix Dido
The Aeneid in Translation

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Literature
of Bard College

by
Jackie Lee McLean

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2012

ii

CONTENTS

Introduction

1

Chapter 1

9

Chapter 2

27

Chapter 3

45

Conclusion

75

1

Introduction

I intend in this brief exploration to examine Virgil’s Aeneid. Why this work of
all the others that I have come to love through my studies and personal forays? As a
Literature major and only part-time student of the Classics, I did not plan upon first
contemplation to focus on such a cornerstone of ancient and contemporary
influence as the Aeneid. I read David West’s rendering of Virgil’s original in the
summer of 2011. Aside from excerpts, this was the first time that I had come into
deep contact with the work. I was overwhelmed by the intensity of the story; the
pathos that stirred in me when I encountered Dido’s tale, the power of conviction
behind the battles, the desperate attempts of each character to understand the
cosmological and ethical structure of his/her world. For the first time, I really
understood the propensity of Virgil’s Aeneid to be used historically as a book of
reference, as it was for many centuries, rendered almost Biblical by the legions who
turned to it for answers. Although the work is over two thousand years old, it is by
no means relegated exclusively to the status of a “schoolroom text” as some critics,
perhaps too hastily, suggest, sealing its fate by the power of academic canonization.
To me the work is personal and relevant. I see similar struggles endured by
people in the world around me as those borne by the characters who live in this
ancient text. The years that divide author and modern reader serve only to sharpen
the gleaming blade that exists in Virgil’s poetry. Virgil’s work sought and still seeks,

2
with more acuity and precision than most contemporary work, to answer questions
that are still unanswered and no less ardently pursued. The modern and continual
relevance of a work as ancient as this makes it all the more remarkable, for it has
traversed such distance and remained not only intact but somehow perpetually
renewed. It is for this reason, this continual relevance, that I believe the Aeneid, itself,
has a transcendent quality either in a specific aspect or as a result of the
amalgamation of specific aspects, the particular or comprising aspects being either
inherent to the substance of the work, itself, as if it were fated to be transcendent, or
else as a result of the timing of its creation thus conferring upon it some sort of
predisposed astrological guidance.
As an additional result of the continual relevance of the work, critics and
scholars recognize Virgil’s work as having a sort of transcendent appeal to authors
and readers; the most obvious example of which being the frequency with which it
is translated, and by whom: those translators being a veritable plethora of people
unable to be broadly categorized by any defining mark of interest or origin. It is in
part due to the oft-spoken reiteration of Virgil’s longevity and veritable
transcendence that many embark upon the task of translating Virgil. Because he is
seen as being able to transcend the Literary canon, he is chased after by those who
seek a certain kind of immortality; this being, of course, the closest thing to a
universal and equalizing characteristic of the human condition. It is important to
wonder, though, about the role, in regards to Virgil’s more modern reception and
relevance, of the actual constant reiteration, so ubiquitous that it has become a
necessary addition to Virgil’s own literary-canon- baggage. Does this assurance of

3
longevity and significance make his work even more likely to be resurrected during
literary lulls or during times of general national or worldwide waywardness,
malaise, or digression?
As a result of this deification of Virgil, whose vestmental layers seem to
infinitely regress, and a borderline fetishization of his work in literary forums, his
beautifully crafted characters have fallen to the wayside in terms of their
significance and value as objects in themselves.
It is partially out of a sense of duty to challenge the treatment of such
characters, but mostly because out of an undeniable and patho-tic propensity, that I
seek to approach the characters, mostly Dido and Aeneas, not as historical figures
within an antiquated and stagnant (canonized) text, but as relevant representations,
dynamic human impressions, intelligent beings. Although their historically recent
marginalization does strengthen my resolve and provide something of a reassuring
incentive for my approach of them as significant and dynamic characters within the
context of the book and not the literary/ academic canon, my motivation is not so
noble or valorous. My emotions have sway over me, and it is they that are deeply
affected and drive me to resolve. I read The Aeneid for the first time out of curiosity
and at leisure. It was, to me, the antitheses of a “schoolroom text,” it was a book that
I read out of my own interest and largely without any background knowledge or
preconceived ideas. All of the research that I have done regarding this book, all of
the thinking and writing of my own, have been spurred by a true love for the work,
itself, not as an academic text, but as a personal and relative entity. Thus, my
impressions of the characters’ trials have never been marginalized to better focus

4
on their respective statuses within, and impacts upon, the collective literary canon.
Instead, I interpret their actions and subjectivities within the context of the book, in
a literary context, but with the knowledge of one well versed in the realm of Classics
and, as expected, educated in the postmodern tradition within which the academic
conception of the “canon” resides.
While I see the characters as very much alive and human, the status of the
work as a whole within the Classical, Academic, and Literary canon, and as it has
existed in society through to the present, must be taken into consideration. For its
continuous significance, I will not neglect to examine the various contexts through
which the work has been received, its historical significance, and, most importantly
for my purposes, its continual rebirth through translation.
It must, at all costs, be remembered that the Aeneid was written in Latin, and
that the language and situ in which it was created play a vital role in its existence
and conception. Most readers of the work encounter it via a translated form. It is
absolutely imperative that we recognize that translations are not interchangeable
with the original. Even the semantics of language herein present a problem as we
are not so much accessing the original through or “by way” of a translation, but are
more realistically coming into contact with a translation of an original. The
translation will, ideally, be in some ways a reconstitution of the essence, as
interpreted by the translator, of the original, and will likely follow a storyline
comparable to that of the original, but will be a translation always, and not the
original. The original is the only original, and translations are always translations. It
is central to my conception of the translation that it can never be “transparent,” or

5
“faithful,” as translations of the Aeneid, in a disproportionate relation to other
translated works profess to be. A translation is not a copy of the original, it is not the
original in a different language. It is a reworking of the material, as internalized by
the translator/writer and thus necessarily employs exclusively the faculties of the
translator (and not the author of the original) and thus is a product of the translator.
It is also necessary to acknowledge that the original language, Latin, is now purely
academic or symbolically significant and not so much practical or encountered in
every-day communication, and so there really aren’t any, or maybe very few, “native
readers” around today.
Even so, there still is the inherent distance between the work and a modern
Latin-reader (as opposed to the distance between the work and a non-Latin-reader)
due to changes in time and reception. There is, of course, even the distance of
subjectivity between the work and an ancient, Latin-speaking reader who lived
during Virgil’s time. This last distance, though, is one of an equalizing nature as it is
inherent in every experience.
So, an integral piece of this project is to examine the difficulties (political,
social, academic and personal) and general nuances and intricacies that translation,
itself, presents upon an original work. Being somewhat proficient in Latin, I attempt
to interact with the original whenever possible for comparative purposes when
examining and conversing with works of translation.
Although there is no such thing as the ever-gleaming ideal of a “transparent
translation,” the appeal of Virgil is so strong as to seem to promise metaphysical
rewards to translators, and many have fallen pray to the belief that the work, itself,

6
is transcendent in that it is so pure and universal that transparent translation is
possible and even morally necessary.
This appeal of the Aeneid is something else that I seek to examine. Quite
consistently, it has remained not only relevant but treasured and revered. Two
thousand years in heavy rotation is long enough to make it truly a piece of the fabric
of human understanding and reference, and even of the human experience. But, it is
not relevant just because it has been around for so long. On the contrary, it has been
around for so long because it is somehow consistently, and even transcendently
(transcending the constricts of time) relevant.
Why is the Aeneid so enduring? The Aeneid is enduring both because of the
cosmological structure of the world of the poem, and because of the patho-tic
quality of the characters, especially Dido, casualty of fate, and her trials as a result of
her involvement with Aeneas- the man pious enough to submit himself to a fated life.
The emotional impact of Dido’s story is understated or ignored in most of the
modern criticism that I have read. This leads me to believe that some critics do not
want to admit the impact that a canonized work, especially one that seems to in
some ways simultaneously signify and defy the very canon, can have on the
emotions. They seem, perhaps, wary of approaching or accepting the sticky,
amorphous, and decidedly un-academic topic of emotion. It is clear to me, however,
that emotional appeal is the single most important aspect of any work of literature,
not least of all of the Aeneid. This is not to say that emotions are divorced from other
faculties of understanding; on the contrary, they are often a barometer of underlying
unity, symmetry, and truth, which can more easily be dissected by non-emotional

7
faculties. Nevertheless, emotional appeal is of undeniable significance. What makes
anything popular or enduring if not some sort of directly causal visceral response? I
also understand the “danger” as a female1 of emphasizing this quality in a work
penned by a man so manly that the spelling of his name was possibly changed to
emphasize his manliness (Vergil to Vir-gil2) but, nevertheless, I stand by the
assertion that the very real and successful appeal to the emotions made by this book
does not only serve to anchor the story in the minds and hearts of readers, but is
necessary in order to illustrate with urgency and high stakes an endeavor most
successful with a reader’s investment, the complications of Aeneas’ state, as well as
the structure of the world within which he and Dido function.
As for the world of the Aeneid, itself, its structure can be examined through
different lenses, ie. different philosophies, in order to be better understood. What is
clear at first reading is that the world is self-contained, ruled by a general hierarchy
within which Gods and fate play a part, and that it is composed of a veritable
mishmash of recognizable philosophies as to be vaguely familiar, to feel inherently
“true,” and yet to be unique and in-attributable.
Finally, in order to analyze the content of the Aeneid to be able to better
understand the structure of the world of that Epic and the importance of pathos and
personal investment of readership in the work, I endeavor to engage upon close
readings of both the original Latin and of translations by Allen Mandelbaum and

1

And, believe me, I understand not wanting even a little bit to fall into the hole of
smug superiority that smacks of misogyny, advanced in a misplaced effort to gain
superiority or respect by fellow females such as Sarah Ruden, self proclaimed ‘first
woman to translate Vergil,’ emphasis on the ‘Ver.’
2 ‘Vir’ meaning ‘man’ in Latin

8
John Dryden. Through these readings, I will attempt to show the characteristics of a
successful translation, read: Dryden’s, which internalizes the spirit of the original
and re-appropriates, by use of the author’s own sensibility and subjective arsenal,
an English re-working that necessarily bears the hallmark and cura of the translator.
What I present here will begin with an analysis of Dryden’s translation and
the difference illustrated therein between translation and summary, as well as the
philosophy of the process of translation, as can be gleaned from an analysis of the
differences between summary and translation. Next, we will look to Dryden’s
translation and observe its nuances, specifically in its portrayal of Dido in relation to
other portrayals including the one crafted by Virgil, himself. We will compare
Dryden’s translation to that of Allen Mandelbaum, move forward to interact with
critical insight into translations of the Aeneid throughout the ages, the cosmology of
the world of the Aeneid, and the nature of the work as it relates specifically to the
process of translation. From there, we will examine the various approaches to
translation, analyze the role of pathos in the Aeneid, evaluate the philosophy and
structure of the work, and consider the cosmology of the world of the Aeneid in its
relation to another ancient text. Finally, we will look at the various characterizations
of Aeneas and follow an explication of Dido and her fate within and outside of the
text.

9

Chapter 1- Translation, Color, and Dryden

In Dryden’s translation of the Aeneid, there is a summary of events before
each Book. The fact that the action is outlined before the verse commences provides
insight into the essence of the translation; the summary is a clear elucidation of a
perception of events as they occur in the original. The events are stated objectively,
but in the breakdown of the proposed objective summary, there are hints as to the
flavor of the interpretation. For each interpretation, as I will continue to argue, has
its own “flavor” as imparted by the translator, and there is no such thing as the
elusive transparent translation.
The summaries, as noted fleetingly in the introduction of the book, are not
authored by Dryden, himself, but rather by a 24-year old Joseph Addison (b. 1672).
That the summaries were composed by someone other than Dryden suggests that
there is much more to The Aeneid than a summary of its events; the verse, itself, is
for story- telling purposes but is also a work of art and scholarly labor. That there is
a summary illuminates this division; there is the verse by Virgil as translated by
Dryden, and there is also the plot of the story, outlined by a nearly anonymous
young man. Though they overlap, there is a distinction. It is also interesting to note
that the summary-writer is not credited predominantly. Rather, his name is

10
mentioned almost as an afterthought- tacked onto the very end of the prefatory
notes. Why does he not get recognition? That he does not suggests to me a
consensus within the world of classics that the essence of a work remains immutable
even through the changes in form, from one language to another, enough so that it
can be summarized without the essence being lost. Addison is not notable because
his work merely puts into words the obvious, what is apparent. This insight is
valuable when considering the role of the translator and the nature of translation.
Further insight into his individual perception of the work, as gleaned by Dryden’s
translation, perhaps, can be found by looking at the content of the summary notes.
The summary states “Dido… makes use of her own and her sister’s entreaties”
(Dryden 93).3 “Makes use” seems to imply some degree of subversive manipulation.
Are we to believe, then, that Addison sees Dido as conniving? That his sympathies lie
with Aeneas? When summarizing a work that was not written in English, as in
translating, word choice is so very important as the words are solely relied upon to
lead the reader to perception and understanding of something they have not read.
Later, he says that Dido in falling in love “discovers all the variety of passions” (Dry.
93). This paints Dido as “every woman” (Dry. 93). She is a citizen of the world, a
woman who is no different from others in that, for her as well as for other women,
there are to be found in love a set “variety of passions,” a universal “variety of
passions.” After, she is called “a neglected lover” (Dry. 93), as if to say that her
autonomy can be exchanged for a platitude, as if her personal experience is one that
places her in a world of shadows and essences- she has come into contact with a
3

Dryden, John. 1997. 93

11
certain kind of previously categorized experience. “When nothing would prevail
upon him, she contrives her own death” (Dry. 93). The cause and effect construction
here makes her actions, undertaken of anguish and desperation, seem premeditated
contrivances.
John Dryden’s care of Dido is pointedly more sensitive and expansive not just
than Addison’s brief summaries but even than Virgil’s treatment of her. From the
beginning of Book IV, the differences are evident. In this part of the story, Dido is
falling in love with Aeneas. Dryden’s version: “The hero’s valor, acts, and birth,
inspire/ her soul with love, and fan the secret fire” (Dry. 4. 3). Virgil’s Latin: Multa
viri virtus animo multusque recursat/ Gentis honos (Aen. 4.3).4
First, in line 3, comes the word “birth.” Critic RG Austin translates the
passage gentis honos (Aen. 4.3) into “the glories of his line,”5 while Dryden renders it,
“the hero’s valor, acts and birth” (Dry. 4.3). The word “birth” draws a more direct
connection between this instance of Dido’s private admittance to her sister, Anna, of
love, and her later public, beseeching cries which hold the same sentiment when
directed to the object of her love, Aeneas. In the latter case, she rues the barrenness
of her love for Aeneas, that no child had been born of it. Si quis mihi parvulus aula
luderet Aeneas (Aen. 4. 328-329), as translated by Austin, “if only I had in my home a
playing baby Aeneas” (Aus. 103). Here, in line 3, she commends his lineage as one of
the factors that make him desirable to her. But by drawing attention to the reference
to lineage with the word “birth,” Dryden’s translation alerts us to the possibility that
4

Austin 1973, 1. Passages of Virgil’s poetry on the Latin will be henceforth cited
(Aen. vv). Also, all lines refer to Book 4 unless otherwise specified.
5

Austin, RG. 1973, 26

12
we are witnessing a sort of psychological slip in which Dido unwittingly reveals her
desire for children, later the absence of which is one of the most tragic elements of
her abandonment. Thus, by choosing the word “birth,” Dryden achieves the set-up
for a beautiful and tragic symmetry later to be realized.
The fact that Dryden’s translation is in verse cannot be overlooked and the
importance of this structure cannot be overstated. By rendering Virgil’s Latin into
poetic, rhyming English (heroic couplets), the structure and meter become essential
guidelines for the language. The language must exist within a new structure that has
been necessarily manipulated, and the original meaning cannot not be compromised,
the patho-tic effect must not be lost, the immensity of the work must remain intact,
and all the while the word choice is reduced to those words that can fit together to
form that combination of words that fit the meter. The words have to fit together as
pieces in a puzzle; none can exist without consideration of the larger structure. The
individual words and phrases need to be carefully chosen and constructed so that
maximum impact and meaning are imparted with utmost consideration for space
and structure- no words can be wasted, extreme thought must go into each choice.
Furthermore, it is necessary that the translator have faith that the tools
available to him, these being pre-existing words and his own imposed structure, are
sufficient. It is essential that he believes in the possibility of re-capturing the power
and subtle nuance of the original work, he must believe that the characters over
which he labors, with nothing but a mental impression and the Latin before him by
way of guidelines, will come to life and resemble those that existed in the minds of
ancient readers, or at least in his own. He must have faith that these things are

13
possible, and that they are possible in English, in verse, and within a structure of
rhyme. He must have faith that the language can accommodate the ideas.
In Dryden’s verse, we see the word “purple,” “when the purple morn had
chased away /the dewy shadows, and restored the day” (Dry. 4.7-8).
This is the first of many times that it appears in Book 4.6 There is an overwhelming
presence of color in Dryden’s translation that is not in the Latin. Alongside purple,
variations of gold appear frequently. The frequency of this coloration makes it
something of a hallmark of Dryden’s translation. The ubiquitous color in Dryden’s
version causes the translation to be more vibrant and memorable than others. The
use of color puts the reader into direct contact with the imagery of the story. It is as
if an arrow is shot from the scene into the breast of the reader, suddenly traversing
the expanse of distance and time inherent in such a work as this, set, written, and
translated in times distant from that of any modern reader. The invocation of purple,
specifically, as well as gold serves to keep a constant reminder of the regality and
richness of both Dido and Aeneas. So regal and rich are they that even the morning
sky echoes their height and fullness in the form of color. The visual nature of the
word “purple” means that an image is conjured as soon as the word is read; the
presence of the color makes the world of Dryden’s translation of Virgil’s work less
foreign and more familiar. The reader can look up from the book and see examples

6

Purple appears in Dryden’s Book 4 in lines 7, 165, 192, 384, 658, 817, and 951. For
purposes of comparison for the color purple only, the color does not appear in
Virgil’s original in the corresponding passages of Dryden’s line 7, 165, 658, 817, or
951. Out of the above seven instances of the color purple in Dryden’s verse,
corresponding mentions in Virgil’s original only occur in two, at corresponding
passages to Dryden’s 192 and 384, Virgil’s 262 and 134. In both cases of Virgil’s
invocations, he is referring to the color of a garment.

14
of the same purple in his world. Color is something that both endures and is also a
form of standard currency. In addition, the proliferation of the color in Dryden’s
verse ties Dido and Aeneas more closely to their world, as in the above case where a
color associated with Dido is apparent in the sunrise.
Certain word choices give the work a distinctive flavor. For instance, in
Dryden’s line 7-8, “when the purple morn had chased away/the dewy shadows, and
restored the day.” The word “restored” is interesting as it keeps the focus on the day,
in particular, and also serves to personify it. By saying that the “purple morn”
“restored the day,” Dryden is implying that night is not equivalent to day, but rather
is a perhaps less desirable state. The day has been injured by the onset of night, and
the “purple morn” is as a healing force, there to restore the day to its rightful
brightness.
Similarly on Dryden’s line 6, when talking of Dido’s love for Aeneas, “his
words, his looks, imprinted on her heart/ improve the passion, and increase the
smart” (Dry. 4. 5-6). Improve implies to a modern reader that the passion is
somehow insufficient. In Dryden’s use, however, the word is used similarly to the
way it would be when talking about the purity of a precious metal, such as gold,
another color often used in both Virgil and Dryden’s verse. With every thought of
Aeneas, the word implies, Dido’s love is more lustrous, pure, and beautiful. This has
a connection to the word lustrabat (Aen. 4.6) in the original Latin during the passage
that describes the dawn, postera Phoebea lustrabat lampade terras (Aen. 4.6). As
said by Warde Fowler lustrabat is “one of the most beautiful and most

15
untranslatable words in the language.”7 In Austin’s words, “it is primarily a religious
term, used of a ritual purification procession.”8 Also in this word, “the idea of
illuminating is implicit: the advancing dawn purifies the world.” Says Fowler, “it is
necessary to feel the word.”9 Dryden’s lines 9-10 read, “her sister first with early
care she sought/and thus in mournful accents eased her thought” (Dry. 4. 9-10)
Here, Dido seeks out her sister, Anna, as the one to whom she first gives voice
to her feelings. In the Latin, the lines are cum sic unanimam adloquitur male sana
sororem (Aen. 4.8). And a word-for word translation of Virgil’s line, “and thus, beside
herself, addressed her sister, the soul of her soul.”10
The two are very different in terms of focus. A stark translation of the Latin
seems to focus on Anna, with the word unanimam, “soul of her soul,” and the phrase
male sana, “beside herself,” both instances indicating that Anna is naturally the one
to whom Dido turns in times of distress. In the words of Austin at the word, sororem,
“Anna has not been mentioned before, but Dido’s action in seeking her out is so
natural and touching that one almost expects to find her.”11 In Dryden’s translation,
we feel a focus on Dido rather than on Anna. Instead of choosing to emphasize
Dido’s fractured state of mind, the fact that she is said in the Latin to be “beside
herself,” Dryden’s verse seems to give Dido a greater sense of autonomy. She is not
groping desperately for aid, as she could be seen to be in a stark translation. Rather,
she seems to be in control of her thoughts and actions, seeking Anna not with

7

Austin, RG. 1973, 27
Austin, RG. 1973, 27
9 Austin, RG. 1973, 27
10 Author’s trans.
11 Austin, RG. 1973, 28
8

16
desperation but “early care,” which seems to imply a care that is gentle and full like
the nature of the budding morning previously described. Similarly, she does not
thrust her anguish upon Anna. Rather, she “eases” her thought out of her own mind
and into the space between her and her sister.
There is a deliberation and control that is evoked in the word, “ease[d].” Her
“accents” are “mournful,” yes, but they are not cries or pleas; they are accents, gentle
and measured. An “accent” is, in the words of the OED, both a “distinctive visual
emphasis; contrast of colour or light; a touch of colour or light which brings the
features of a structure into relief or provides a contrast in a composition or colour
scheme.” And “the way in which anything is said or sung; a style of pronunciation, a
manner of utterance, a tone or quality of voice; a character of sound; a musical or
quasi-musical intonation of the voice; a modulation or modification of the voice
expressing feeling” (OED) 12. The invocation of color and light is a sub-connotation
that makes the word all the more perfect for this place in the verse, wherein
reference to light and color surrounds it. Thus, Dido’s voice is said to be in such a
tone that it conveys her “mournful[ness],” but she still eases her thoughts out into
the open with a deliberateness and patience that assures the reader of her presence
of mind and autonomy.
As will become more clear throughout this chapter, Dryden’s treatment of
Dido makes her shape in the mind of an English speaker correspond to the care that
Virgil might have conferred in writing her; she is vibrant, beautiful, and autonomous.

12

Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012. Web. 16 Apr
2012.

17
There is nothing pitiful in her, and this makes her eventual anguish all the more
tragic. I remained faithful to Aeneas while reading the prose translation of David
West; I pitied Dido but I did not bitterly regret her death. After reading Dryden’s
verse, I am not as sympathetic towards Aeneas. Dido is Dryden’s vibrant hero,
brutally decimated by an unworthy foe, Aeneas, the callous pawn of fate. In the
larger picture, empathy for Dido is essential because it underscores the difficulty of
the path towards the founding of Rome.
Duncan Kennedy in his piece “Modern Receptions and Their Interpretive
Implications,” 13 reiterates the fact that the Aeneid is, from the beginning, about the
end. From the prophetic utterings and the benefit of historical hindsight, we know
what the end result of Aeneas’ quest will be from the moment we embark upon the
journey. What has been accomplished cannot be undone, the certain specific end is
inevitable. Dido, he says, does not exist within this framework; rather, she is a
casualty of it. By virtue of being a part of the narrative, she does have a place in the
framework, but her brush with Aeneas is incidental and almost tangential to the
trajectory of the story. Looking at the Aeneid as a transcription of true events, a selfcontained world and not a constructed narrative, as Kennedy seems to do in his
piece, Dido’s life is on a course of its own. She is, in fact, on her own path “to the
stars” before she crosses paths with Aeneas. She is so independent and self-reliant,
and yet is taken with Aeneas so violently and fatally, that she is a true casualty not
unlike Catullus’ flower, touched by a passing plow (Catullus 23-24) 14.

13

Martindale 1997, 145.

14

Catullus, “Poem XI,” vv.23-24

18
Dido seems to find validation for her feelings in the imposing presence of
Aeneas. It is as if she can’t help but be drawn to him (she is, after all, shot by Cupid’s
arrow). She seems to say as much in Dryden’s verse, “his worth, his actions, and
majestic air/ a man descended from the gods declare” (Dry. 4. 16), and Virgil’s prose,
genus esse deorum (Aen. 4.12).
Perhaps Dido even feels that Aeneas’ divine lineage indicates that he is fated
for her, sent to her from above. That he is descended from the gods sets him apart
from other men and surely adds to the allure of his presence. This line also sets up a
poignant and beautiful contrast to the later words spoken by Dido in reference to
Aeneas’ true lineage, the lineage that he shows himself to have not by his birth but
by his actions, cold and hard, as if descended from stone (Aen. 4.367).
One of the most moving passages of Book IV is during Dido’s confession,
which reads much like a soliloquy, of her love for Aeneas and the conflicting feelings
that surround this admission. In the Latin, Dido refers to her sister by name on two
occasions, once on line 9 and again on line 20. In Dryden’s translation, however,
these addresses do not appear. Because of this, the tone of the section is less like a
dialogue and more like a monologue. We do not have reminders of Anna’s presence,
as we do in the Latin. This allows us to see Dido as a more self-reliant character; she
is working through her thoughts in the presence of her sister, but she is not in
explicit conversation with her. It seems then that this is one example of the way that
Dryden’s Dido is more overtly stable and independent than Virgil’s, who invokes the
name of her sister numerous times and is characterized as male sana (Aen. 4.8),

19
“beside herself,” and of a mind that has “lost its health.”15 It is clear that, in her
fragile state, Virgil’s Dido calls upon Anna out of dire need and borderline
desperation, as Anna is her unanimam (Aen. 4.8) “soul of her soul,” and the one to
which she can turn when her own mind is not sound.
Dryden, in removing the invocations and making Dido’s speech more of a
self-exploratory soliloquy, lets the reader see Dido as a strong individual, not subject
to pejorative conditions stereotypically regarded as specifically female such as
mental instability and emotional frailty. No, Dryden’s Dido is a strong person, and a
leader first and foremost. She is painfully aware of the judgments to be made upon
her swelling change of heart, so much in fact that she is the first to criticize and even
scorn herself. It is through this self-scorn that we understand her unwillingness to
accept these feelings, and also the strength that they must have to be able to remain,
unbidden, in one as steadfast as Dido.
Dido’s tears first appear, “gushing from her eyes” (Dry. 4.40), at the end of
her soliloquy. The tears follow a fierce admonition of herself, in which Dido vows
that before she will “Break the plighted faith I gave” (Dry. 4.37), and pursue new
love with Aeneas, she should be subject to all types of tortures and be “condemned
with ghosts in endless night to lie” (Dry. 4.36). That the tears appear here, and not
before, indicates that they are, at least partially, from frustration with herself. She
does not want to fall in love because she feels a sense of duty, she feels that she must
remain faithful to the memory of her late husband. This crippling, frustrating sense
of duty conflicts with the overwhelming feelings she has for Aeneas.

15

Austin, RG. 1973, 27

20
Here, a parallel must not be overlooked. While Aeneas is driven by a sense of
duty and a fated prophecy to leave Dido and ultimately lay down the foundations of
Rome, Dido is compelled in the opposite direction. She has high aspirations to
“reach the stars” (Aen. 4.322) through her work and also a will to remain true to her
convictions, mainly her strong belief that she must remain faithful to her late
husband. It is conceivable that all of this could have been accomplished except that
there is direct interference, an interception and redirection that occurs when Cupid,
disguised as Ascanius, causes Dido to fall in love with Aeneas. Dido, in that her fate
becomes the subject of a direct godly intervention for the purpose of Aeneas’ fate, is
a casualty of both love and war in the fullest sense of the word. Her emotions are
manipulated so that they overpower her every other sense, she is compelled to love
one who is necessarily unwilling and, perhaps, unable to be hers. The gods
deliberately manipulate her into feelings that lead to her own destruction. The
feelings that she develops for Aeneas, one who is ordered by a higher power to
forfeit his own desires for the ultimate reward of glory and immortality, are, as they
have been ordained by a higher power, just as strong as his convictions to leave.
I do not know if all divine interventions are created equally. That is, while
Dido was struck by love for Aeneas, (certainly an intervention) her feelings
overpower her to the point of suicide. Aeneas, chosen by the Gods to lay the
foundations of Rome, seems more of a pawn, moved by exhortations and threats,
than consumed by emotion and an inner conviction to carry out the will of the Gods.
He is certainly dutiful, and does quell his own desires in order to carry out the job he
is fated to perform, most evident in Virgil’s characterization of him as an oak, with a

21
hard exterior and silent tears, but he does at times forget about his duty which
prompts not one but two warnings from Jove via Mercury that the job must be done.
It seems to me as if Aeneas is placed upon a boat guided by the Gods and that his
part in the completion of the journey is that he remains sitting on it (the boat). Dido
on the other hand is driven to passion by the godly intervention and is propelled to
extinction by the love sparked within her.
Anna intervenes as soon as Dido is stopped by the onset of her tears. This
shows their close connection- Anna picks up where Dido leaves off. Anna’s
inundations make even more clear to the reader the nature of her relationship with
Dido. Anna clearly has Dido’s best interest in mind; she urges her to live for the joys
of life and not let herself live “without the joys of mother or of wife” (Dry. 4.45).
Anna says, “think you these tears, this pompous train of woe/are known or valued
by the ghosts below?” (Dry. 4.46-47).
This specific heroic couplet sounds similar to the sentiment expressed in
Andrew Marvell’s “To His Coy Mistress,” (Marvell 25-30) which was written some
fifty years before Dryden’s verse. This similarity is one example of the way in which
a translation can be influenced by the time period in which it is produced. This
couplet, however, does differ from the famous lines of Marvell’s poem, “thy beauty
shall no more be found/ nor, in thy marble vault, shall sound/my echoing song: then
worms shall try/that long preserved virginity/ and your quaint honor turn to dust/
and into ashes all my lust” (Marvell 25-30). Both Anna’s admonitions and the
sentiment in Marvell’s lines allude to the fleeting nature of life and the importance of
living for the living, so to speak. In Marvell’s poem, however, the speaker reminds

22
the listener that her life is finite, and in doing so encourages her to take a chance on
him. Anna in her words to Dido reminds her that other lives are finite and that
Sychaeus, being dead, cannot appreciate or even know of the sacrifices that Dido is
making in his honor.
Closely following, there is perhaps another literary allusion. “I grant, that,
while your sorrows yet were green/ it well became a woman, and a queen, /the
vows of Tyrian princes to neglect/ to scorn Iarbus and his love reject” (Dry. 4.48-51).
It is by no means unusual to see references to color in Dryden’s translation.
On the contrary, there are innumerable references to specific colors throughout
Book IV, most commonly purple and gold, which signify royalty and privilege. This
is a rare departure, however, from the ubiquitous gold and purple and immediately
brings to mind another mention of the color green, famous in classical studies. This
instance is in Sappho’s poem 31. Not all translations of Fragment 31 include the
word “green,” but most do and, in Robert Lowell’s translation the color is most
vibrantly represented in the last stanza, “I shiver. A dead whiteness spreads over/
my body, trickling pinpricks of sweat./I am greener than the greenest green grass/ I
die!” (Lowell 13-16).16 As Lowell recognizes, there is so much possibility in the color
green. There is the green of saplings. This kind of young green seems to be to what
Dryden refers with his use of the color when illustrating Dido’s sorrows. There is
also, along with youth, a connotation of vibrancy, vitality, life. Green is the color of
nature and thus the natural color of life. In Lowell’s translation of Sappho’s fragment
31, the closeness between life and death is shown. There is a bountiful emergence of

16

"Sappho: Poem of Jealousy." vv 13-16

23
green, “greener than the greenest green grass,” and then, separated by just a dash, “I
die!” It is shown, then, the truth that the most vibrant green of life is often realized
just before or in conjunction with death. Thus, while green is aligned closely with
life, its overwhelming vibrancy means that it is associated, too, with death. There is
further evidence for this reading in a later passage of Book IV wherein Dido is
preparing her deathbed, “and every baleful green denoting death” (Dry. 4.732).
This color is then fitting for Dryden’s passage. Dryden is showing us that
Dido’s sorrows were once young and fresh, brightly felt because of her inexperience
with life. We have, as well, a foreshadowing of new “green sorrows” that will cause
Dido to feel her life so powerfully that she will be able to bear it no longer.
In Dryden’s translation of the Aeneid, there is, in fact, a distinct vividness that
permeates the story and colors the events so that they are able to be directly
encoded into the mind and memory of the reader. Each color is an instant
association- brilliant flashes of color become hallmarks in the memory that make
the subject of the verse easy to recall, so vivid as to be impossible to forget.
In every way the language of the writing is vivid, full, alive. Always the
language favors physical description and the frequent invocation of specific colors,
often absent in the Latin, to create a unique, universally accessible, non-time specific
vividness in the mind of the reader. With each subsequent mention of color the
mental painting that advances along with the reading becomes more dimensional,
full, lifelike. In addition, the frequent brush strokes attune the mind of the reader to
pick up on other, more subtle indications of color, accent, and depth throughout the
verse.

24
In the segment of Dryden’s verse before Aeneas and Dido consummate their
union, there are a multitude of vivid, colorful words that drive the image deeply into
the mind,
Preferring Juno’s power (for Juno ties
The nuptial knot and makes the marriage joys),

80

The beauteous queen before her alter stands
And holds the golden goblet in her hands.
A milk-white heifer she with flowers adorns,
And pours the ruddy wine betwixt her horns;
And, while the priests with prayer the Gods invoke,

85

She feeds their alters with the Sabaean smoke;
With hourly care the sacrifice renews,
And anxiously the panting entrails views (Dry. 4.79-88).
There is the characterization of the queen as “beauteous” (81) the “golden goblet”
(82), the “milk-white heifer” (83), the flowers that adorn the alabaster coat, the
“ruddy wine” (84), the “Sabaean smoke” (86). Then there is the indication of
repetition, “with hourly care the sacrifice renews” (87). This entire scene thus
repeats and is intensified. Lastly, there are the “panting entrails” (88), which, in the
reader’s primed state of mind, are surely a vivid purple and red.
For contrast, we can compare this portion of Dryden’s translation to the
corresponding lines in that of Allen Mandelbaum’s translation, c. 1972.
They slaughter chosen sheep, as is the custom,
And offer them to Ceres, the lawgiver,

25
To Phoebus, Father Bacchus, and –above all- 80
To Juno, guardian of marriage. Lovely
Dido holds the cup in her right hand;
She pours the offering herself, midway
Between the milk-white heifer’s horns. She studies
Slit breasts of beasts and reads their throbbing guts. (Man. 78-85)17
There is “lovely” (81) Dido, “the offering” (83), the same “milk-white heifer” (84),
“throbbing guts” (85). Mandelbaum’s translation, in comparison to Dryden’s, is
much sharper, more angular, pointy and almost ungainly with sharp appendages
jutting out, bent elbows and knobby knees. The language does not flow and swirl
and dance, nor does it paint a colorful mental image. It is awkward and stilted and it
reads, plainly, like an attempted “faithful translation,” not imbued with spirit as an
interpretive translation might be, as Dryden’s is- an interpretation, an appropriation,
a re-figuration of material treasured, internalized, respun.
Insight into the Mandelbaum translation is gleaned with a look to the preface
of his work:
“I have tried to impress what Macrobius heard and Dante learned on this
translation, to embody both the grave tread and the speed and angularity Virgil can
summon, the asymmetrical thrust of a mind on the move, I have tried to annul what
too many readers of Virgil in modern translations have taken to be his: the flat and
unvarious, and the loss of shape and energy where the end of the line is inert-

17

Allen Mandelbaum, 1971. 85

26
neither reinforced nor resisted- and the mass of sound becomes amorphous and
anonymous” (Man. xiv).
And this haunting phrase that tormented Mandelbaum and initially
dissuaded him from tackling the translation: “If you take from Virgil his diction and
metre, what do you leave him?” (Man. ix )
Mandelbaum seems to have forgotten a cardinal rule of creative work- it is
futile to embody. One can emulate, but to try to embody is futile. Mandelbaum does
not try to obfuscate his aim. He states clearly that his goal is to “embody both the
grave tread and the speed and angularity Virgil can summon” (Man. xiv). He is
fixated on producing that fabled, ever-sought “faithful translation.” Down to Virgil’s
innate spirit and style, Mandelbaum wishes to embody, to channel, to reproduce. In
so doing, Mandelbaum is effectively trying to be Virgil- to write with his style and
sensibility, but for the English-speaker’s ear. He does not realize that such things as
style and sensibility cannot be divorced from the mind from which they originate,
nor are they mutable or transferrable.

27

Chapter 2- Taking on the Critics

In his essay, “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,”
philosopher Walter Benjamin emphasizes that the aura or essence of the original, in
this case Virgil’s original Latin Aeneid, can never be transmuted because it is rooted
in the original’s (Virgil's) time and space. Efforts to transmute the aura while
removing from the object (the original) everything but perceived meaning are futile.
Even if one sets out to translate faithfully by substituting each Latin word with its
English equivalent, the complications that would arise in terms of grammar and
word choice alone would surely cause the meaning to be compromised if not lost
entirely.18 The aura is not just in the words, it is a part of the thing, itself. To try to
translate “faithfully” is thus impossible on many levels. Successful endeavors, in that
they are moving and pleasant to read, are a result of carefully crafted poetry or
prose in which the translator endeavors to evoke a response similar to that which
he or she experiences when coming into contact with the original. Thus, the original
must be of prime inspiration, but the translation must be also a result of a liberal use
of the writer/translator’s own talent. Dryden’s product, because it is inspired by
Virgil but decidedly of Dryden, is infinitely more enduring and pleasant to read than

18

Benjamin 1936, Part III&IX

28
endeavors such as Mandelbaum’s, which stubbornly try to carry, like water in
cupped hands, the essence of Virgil’s original into a faithful English translation.
It cannot be denied that there is but one Virgil, as there is but one
Mandelbaum, one Dryden. It is fruitless to rob the body and mind of creativity and
to try, instead, to shape them into a conduit for another. Every reading is an
interpretation, and every interpretation is different. What better proof of the “right
way” to translate then in the longevity of Dryden’s translation? Where writers such
as Mandelbaum try to imitate (always a losing game because when the goal is to
produce something which already exists, the only possible outcome is a lesser one),
Dryden chose to re-appropriate. Instead of trying to faithfully transcribe from one
language to another, Dryden internalized the passions of the work and set to repaint
them in a palette of his own. Such a work does not need to stay close to an original
and count as faults any departure. Rather, Dryden’s work has freedom to soar,
dependent only upon Dryden’s own sensibilities by which Virgil’s original has been
internalized in a way specific to Dryden.
The source of Mandelbaum’s main concern when starting his translation was,
“If you take from Virgil his diction and meter, what do you leave him?”
(Mandelbaum ix) and with this he set himself up for complications. One cannot take
away, in any sense of the word, Virgil’s diction and meter. Additionally, translation
need not be a paring down. When it is most successful, it is an expansion or
elaboration. If you approach the task of translating as the process of taking from an
author his diction and meter, then all that can be left are words. Words, orphaned,
out of context, and strung together in a necessary, ungainly way. If you try to imitate,

29
then, Latin’s meter, you have only a clunky, anachronous, meter that does not
enhance the words but acts as a placeholder for what is not there. Try then to
imitate Virgil’s diction, and what is before you is a collection of out-of-context words,
a clunky, anachronous meter, and a feeble imitation of a style not meant to be
separated from meter and vocabulary. Instead of trying to salvage style, meter, and
diction, a successful translation picks up on the intentions behind the language, the
passions that drive the characters, the interweaving of themes, the conflict between
fate and free will, past and future, present and eternity. The beauty of the scene, the
life in the words.
In many respects, Dryden’s work shows itself to be superior to the more
modern Mandelbaum translation, though both are irrevocably tied to Virgil’s
original. Take, for instance, this passage:
Poenorum exspectant, ostroque insignis et auro
stat sonipes ac frena ferox spumantia mandit.

135

tandem progreditur magna stipante caterva
Sidoniam picto chlamydem circumdata limbo;
cui pharetra ex auro, crines nodantur in aurum,
aurea purpuream subnectit fibula vestem.
nec non et Phrygii comites et laetus Iulus
incedunt. ipse ante alios pulcherrimus omnis
infert se socium Aeneas atque agmina iungit.
qualis ubi hibernam Lyciam Xanthique fluenta
deserit ac Delum maternam invisit Apollo

140

30
instauratque choros, mixtique altaria circum

145

Cretesque Dryopesque fremunt pictique Agathyrsi:
ipse iugis Cynthi graditur mollique fluentem
fronde permit crinem fingens atque implicat auro,
tela sonant umeris: haud illo segnior ibat
Aeneas, tantum egregio decus enitet ore. (Aen. 4.134-150)

The above lines are re-worked by Dryden to read:
The rosy morn was risen from the main;
And horns and hounds awake the princely train:
They issue early through the city gate,
Where the more wakeful huntsmen ready wait,

185

With nets, and toils, and darts, beside the force
Of Spartan dogs, and swift Massylian horse.
The Tyrian peers and officers of state,
For the slow queen, in antichambers wait:
Her lofty courser, in the court below

190

(Who his majestic rider seems to know),
proud of his purple trappings, paws to the ground;
and champs the golden bit, and spreads the foam around.
The queen at length appears: on either hand,
The brawny guards in martial order stand.
A flowered cymar with golden fringe she wore,

195

150

31
And at her back a golden quiver bore;
Her flowing hair a golden caul restrains;
A golden clasp the Tyrian robe sustains.
Then young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace

200

Leads on the Trojan youth to view the chase.
But far above the rest in beauty shines
The great Aeneas, when the troop he joins;
Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost
Of wintry Xanthus, and the Lycian coast;

205

When to his native Delos he resorts,
Ordains the dances, and renews the sports;
Where painted Scythians, mixed with Cretan bands,
Before the joyful alters join their hands:
Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below

210

The merry madness of the sacred show.
Green wreaths of bays his length of hair enclose;
A golden fillet binds his awful brows;
His quiver sounds.- Not less the prince is seen
In manly presence, or in lofty mien.

(Dry. 4.182-215)

215

The word sonipes (Aen. 4.135), as pointed out by Austin, “suggests the ring of the
hoofs as the horse paws the ground.”19 Also, the alliteration and assonance of the

19

Austin, RG. 1973, 63

32
words spumantia mandit in the same line “suggest the noise of the horse’s jaws.”20
Both of these observations of onomatopoeia are essential to appreciating Dryden’s
own re-working of the passage. Similarly to what Virgil does with his use of soundimitating constructions, Dryden accomplishes the feat of mimicking sense
perception, with his trademark- the use of color. In the couplet, “proud of his purple
trappings, paws to the ground;/ and champs the golden bit, and spreads the foam
around” (Dry. 192-193), Dryden makes the bit golden while both colors are
mentioned in the original Latin as colors of the horse’s robes. The vibrancy here
allows us to feel like we are present, witnessing the scene. There is also alliteration
in Dryden’s line 192, this joins the action to the emotion to the color and allows
them to be intertwined. The pride, the purple, the pawing, are all of the same
essence. Thus, the color purple becomes all the more powerful as it is here aligned
with emotion as well as action.
While the second line of the couplet in Virgil’s original can be literally
translated to read “there stands her steed, and proudly champs the foaming bit”
(Aus. 63), Dryden implies pride by making the bit golden. With his addition of color
we are able to see the pride of Dido’s kingdom- even the horse’s bit, meant to be
covered in spit, is opulent. The “champ’ing” (193) of the “golden” (193) bit somehow
further heightens the goldness of it, not unlike the sensory experience of the “sharp
glittering tip” of Cupid’s golden arrow in Ovid’s tales (Ovid 1.470). Although Dryden
takes some liberties with color here, this is one of the most colorful passages
altogether in the Latin. In lines 138-39, a literal translation of the Latin may read

20

Austin, RG. 1973, 63

33
“she [Dido] has a quiver of gold, her hair is knotted into a gold clasp, golden is the
brooch that underfastens her purple dress” (Aus. 63). Dryden adds to this also “A
flowered cymar with golden fringe” (196), as well as the colors in the
aforementioned couplet for an effect of overwhelming brilliance; shining gold and
deep purple everywhere. Dido, in fact, seems to be made of gold as it accommodates
her every need, making even function opulent.
What we later learn, of course, is that even Dido’s hair is the color of gold.
nondum illi flavum Proserpina vertice crinem/ abstulerat ( Aen. 4.698-699). This is
remarkable for the time period and, although not unprecedented, definitely rare.
From this passage, it seems possible that her hair color is meant to further reflect
her ethereal composition- that she is quite literally meant for the stars and, thus, all
the more tragic in her eventual fall. Later in the passage, slightly beyond what is
transcribed, are the words fulvum… leonem (Aen. 159) in a description of a lion.
Fulvum means either “tawny” or “yellow.” Dryden chooses to translate this bit as “a
tawny lion” (Dry. Line 230), but Mandelbaum does something interesting when he
calls it “golden” (Man. Line 212). While Dryden doesn’t specify the color of the hair
that Proserpina (Aen. 698-699) cuts from Dido’s head, Virgil specifies that it is
yellow (Aen. 698). Mandelbaum, however, calls it golden (Man. 212). The fact that
he chooses to make both her hair and the mighty lion gold means that they both
become instantly related to the opulence of the kingdom, and also that they both
become similar to one another. Dido’s hair color is suddenly otherworldly and rare,
and she is also suddenly compared to a lion- the most beautiful and powerful animal

34
of the kingdom. It seems, then, that although Mandelbaum doesn’t often take
liberties with color in his translation, he certainly recognizes the power of it.
Mandelbaum’s translation of the long passage above, L134-150 in the Latin,
is as follows:
…But while the chieftains
of Carthage wait at Dido’s threshold, she
still lingers in her room. Her splendid stallion,
in gold and purple, prances, proudly champing

180

his foaming bit. At last the queen appears
among the mighty crowd; upon her shoulders
she wears a robe of Sidion with embroidered
borders. Her quiver is of gold, her hair
has knots and ties of gold, a golden clasp

185

holds fast her purple cloak. Her Trojan comrades
and glad Ascanius advance behind her.
Aeneas, who is handsome past all others,
himself approaches now to join her, linking
his hunting band to hers. Just as Apollo,

190

when in the winter he abandons Lycia
and Xanthus’ streams to visit his maternal
Delos, where he renews the dances- Cretans,
Dryopians, and painted Agathyrsi,
mingling around the alters, shout- advances

195

35
upon the mountain ridges of high Cynthus
and binds his flowing hair with gentle leaves
and braids its strands with intertwining gold;
his arrows clatter on his shoulder: no
less graceful is Aeneas as he goes;

200

an equal beauty fills his splendid face.
Mandelbaum does not start his lines with capital letters. This is a stylistic choice that
both confers a “no-frills,” “faithful” approach, and directly emulates the traditional
Latin approach. The absence of rhyme also distinguishes Mandelbaum’s translation
from Dryden’s. While Dryden takes enough liberties with the Latin text to be able to
mold an English rendering into the form-constraints of poetry, Mandelbaum opts to
translate in a more word-for-word fashion.
The introductions of Aeneas also vary. Mandelbaum introduces Aeneas in
this passage on line 188; “Aeneas, who is handsome past all others, himself
approaches now to join her, linking his hunting band to hers.” Mandelbaum’s Aeneas
is “handsome past all others.” While we understand from this that Aeneas is the
handsomest of all, the placement of this assertion, after the dazzling description of
Dido’s beauty, is in Mandelbaum’s prose slightly undermined by the word,
“handsome” which, in the modern reader’s lexicon, relates more often to masculine
beauty. Thus, there is less tension inherent in the description of Aeneas, brief and
pointed as it is, than there might be if another (unisex) word were used. In other
words, what we understand here is simply that Aeneas is “handsome past all others.”

36
In the Latin, Aeneas is pulcherrimus (Aen. 141). While pulcherrimus is indeed
the masculine form of the word that means “beautiful,” a more direct comparison
between the appearance of Dido and that of Aeneas is made in the Latin than
expressed by Mandelbaum with his use of the word “handsome” (Man.188). In the
Latin, Aeneas is pulcherimus (the most beautiful of all) while Dido is pulcherrima
(Aen. 60 “forma pulcherrima Dido”). It is interesting to note that this description is
given to Dido, at line 60, as she performs the rites that she hopes will draw Aeneas
to her. Is she then made beautiful by her desire for Aeneas? Is he the shining beacon
that can onto others confer lustre?
So, in the Latin a direct comparison, by use of gendered forms of the same
word, is drawn between the appearance of Aeneas and Dido. While in the
Mandelbaum translation we are lead to understand that Aeneas is “handsome past
all others” (188), in the Latin we see clearly that Aeneas is more beautiful,
specifically, even than Dido. The impact of this assertion is even more profound as it
is so simply put, ipse ante alios pulcherrimus omnis (Aen.141), and as it is thus so
definitive. The assertion and the plain manner in which it is asserted is all the more
profound in that it follows an extended description of Dido’s beauty and majestycompelling in part by the heightened effect of lush fabrics and metals which, in
comparison to Aeneas’ simply stated superiority, seem futile and affected. Dido, by
the assertion alone, is effectively diminished. It is shown that Aeneas is superior and
favored by fate.
Although Mandelbaum does translate truthfully in showing pulcherrimus to
mean “handsome,” a vital tension apparent in the Latin is not conveyed with the use

37
of this word. In order to convey an original tension, the words need not be
translated individually, but must be seen in all their glory as means to reach an end.
That end must be internalized in the constitution of the translator and construction
of the translation, and the means thus assembled in the way thought best to be able
to transmit that end. Individual words in the Latin original all hold allusions and
connotations that must be considered; they are part of a more complex tapestry, the
nature of which must be internalized before a reworking of it, by the use of new
threads, may be woven.
I do not mean to imply that it is an easy task to take on the role of translator.
Indeed, it is so complex and difficult a job to preserve nuance and tension, while
producing body of work coherent and pleasant to one who has never read the Latin
and approaches the translation as his or her only experience with Virgil’s epic, all
the while “weaving with new threads” a tapestry that produces a similar effect on
the reader of English as would the original upon another reader, the latter’s
message having been internalized. It so difficult that to have even one version that
meets all of the aspirations is a success for humanity.
It is my belief that in the aforementioned passage, as well as in many others,
the spirit of the original is best represented in Dryden’s work. Colin Burrow in his
article “Virgil in English Translation,”21 offers some elucidation on the subject of
translation and its inherent complications.

21

Martindale 1997, 21

38
Burrow’s article states the two guiding axioms or “irreconcilable
tendencies22” of Virgilian translation: that Virgil is a poet of “divided loyalties, whose
poems cannot completely align themselves with the empire of Rome” (21), and that
in a “perfect translation” of Virgil, the translator would be “invisible” (21). In
accordance with his observations, it seems that works of Virgil are as clay to
successive generations- to be modeled and shaped at the will of the translator. The
act of translation is embarked upon in order to verify the individual who is
translating; the act itself is a means for the translator to cement for himself a place
in the canon of literary history, while worth and agency can be expressed through
the imposition of nuanced meaning in the individual translation. Thus, the act of
translation is one that verifies or validates the individual, while the particulars of
choice impressed by the translator into the work are a definitive expression of
agency.
It is almost immediately clear that, because one of the main reasons for
translation (as expressed by Burrow) is the expression of agency, the idea of an
“invisible translator” is a fallacy. Burrow states,
Virgil tends to be adopted into English by poets who need the
consolation of his (Virgil’s) authority or the sustaining dream of his
imperial vision.23
Implicit in this statement is the belief that Virgil is somehow super-mortal, (an
image of Virgil in a superhero costume comes to mind emblazoned “SUPER
VIR…gil”) as if Virgil’s presence in the literary canon transcends the canon, itself.
22
23

Martindale 1997, 21
Martindale 1997, 21.

39
Less outrageous than the idea that Virgil is somehow super-mortal is the notion that
his ideas transcend placement in history-specific time. In continuation of the
perceived Superman- transcendent quality of Virgil, Burrow states:
Chaucer, like many a medieval [and, dare I say modern] reader of the
Aeneid, is overwhelmed by the pathetic tale of Dido, which comes to
dominate his paraphrase. The strength of his pity for Dido enables
him to forget that his poem has a source in Virgil (“non other auctour
alegge I”) and to present himself as the author of the poem.24
Burrow presents this easy ownership of the work as being a result of its seemingly
universal quality, as well as the power that the work is believed to possess to
politically empower individual translators. I believe that the political power of the
work, as perceived by translators, is due to the emotional power of the work. The
Aeneid deeply engages the emotions of the reader. The value of such pathos to the
modern reader is understated in all of the commentary I have encountered. There is
intrinsic value, I believe, in emotional engagement in that it can allow a reader to
experience both deep emotional and spiritual epiphanies that can be enlightening
and thus enhance the quality of existence. This value is rarely commented upon
although it undoubtedly plays an essential part in the endurance of this work and its
near continuous presence throughout the ages.
Douglas and Chaucer are mentioned as having two of the strongest responses
to the pathos of the Aeneid. In their translations, they each demonstrated their own

24

Martindale 1997, 22.

40
agency in choosing to emphasize certain aspects by strengthening certain words. I
do not doubt that Burrow is correct in saying that Douglas’ translation was skewed
with the idea of attaining a sort of literary immortality, an eye for the stars, perhaps,
through flattery of the ruling monarch in both aspects of the translation and the
dedication, but I think that the nature of the work specifically encourages
internalization which can thus organically result in translations that are unique to
the interpretations of or emotional effects upon the translators. In an interesting
psycho-anthropological turn, Burrow states:
Cultures which are uneasy about their own status are more likely to
produce translations than those who are confident about the strength
of their native literature… [in terms of individuals,] the act of
translating Virgil gives English writers the sense of writing an empire
even if they could not themselves participate in one.25
Like grabbing for the tail of a comet, people gravitate to the greatness of the Aeneid.
The hope for vicarious magnitude drives them to translation. This seems cynical and
discounts any possible noble ambition. It is reiterated that each translation reflects
the personal experiences of the translator or even of the time -as the work once
went through a phase of Christian flavored translations. This says to me that the
work is so full of truth and beauty that people can’t help but internalize and
appropriate it. Burrow points out that Stanyhurst tried to forcefully conquer The
Aeneid by “naturaliz[ing] in English the effects of Virgil’s hexameters.”26 The failure
of this endeavor is evidence that the meter (form) is subservient to the greater
25
26

Martindale 1997, 23
Martindale 1997, 25.

41
meaning and message of the poem, which can be compromised by imposed
constraints of form. From this we learn that the essence of the work is not
necessarily attached to a specific, original form, or at least that the formal and
stylistic hallmarks of the Latin cannot be successfully appropriated, tacked onto, a
translator’s re-working and so the work is best re-presented as an internalized
reworking of the original.
Taking this into account along with the fact that “current” events
surrounding the individual translator are influential upon reception, the ideas
themselves within the work are strong enough that the Aeneid always resists “the
simplicities of an imposed ideology.”27 In addition, the text is virtually exempt from
attempts at moralization as it is perfectly idealistic and self-contained in the world
of the work. The mishmash of philosophies and ideologies within it serve to produce
something without a definitive stamp- what results is an original patho-tic story that
is both strong and insular enough to be universal.
Burrow points out that, after 1700, the translator’s duty was made a moral
one.28 This required a perceived faithfulness (impossible to attain as it necessitates
an invisible translator). This approach, in my opinion, circumvents the beauty of the
text, as it has, along with a vital structure, an inherent propensity for elasticity and
interpretation. Thus, inspired readings and translations are essential as much of the
strength and endurance of the story can be attributed to its patho-tic quality. To

27
28

Martindale 1997, 37.
Martindale 1997, 31.

42
emphasize the futility of an attempted “faithful translation,” Burrow remarks that
even rigid translations bore hallmarks of Milton and thus were traceable.29
An observation on the part of Burrow regarding a trend, the nature of which
I find to be disheartening, is that which categorizes The Aeneid in the “current”
literary canon as domain of the “schoolroom,” a recently christened “schoolroom
text” (34), one whose criticism now tends to lean toward the realm of parody. This
is depressing to me as I view the work as one that is indispensible, not as a jumping
off point for critics and proponents of sematic and logic games, but as a work of
literature to be enjoyed by even the non-academic individual. The original attraction
of the work is to me its timeless, narrative strands of love and duty, the story, itself,
the poetic structure, the truth within it felt by many a reader. Although we have
again the problem of which translation to read, the original alluring qualities of the
book remain and prove still to be enduring.
One of the most interesting things about Burrow’s article is the observation
that modern versions of the book do not have anywhere about them
acknowledgements that they are translations. The translator cannot be invisible,
especially in the case of a work as strong and significant as The Aeneid. In a
breathtaking turn of events, the “ultimate transparency” of the translator has turned
into implicit authorship. By not acknowledging that they are translators, translators
become so “invisible” as translators that they become authors! This revelation
seems to me a full circle completion that accomplishes the originally professed goal

29

Martindale 1997, 31

43
of translating as an attempt to hold a piece of the empire. In ceasing to call
themselves translators, the translators appoint themselves creator of the empire.
Virgil’s status makes translators feel that they should suppress their
own presence in order to allow his voice to emerge, despite the
intentions, Virgil appeals to those who have a desire to reinsert
themselves.30

Through these observations, I believe that Burrow’s two “irreconcilable”
conditions can be brought together, at last.
In comparison to Mandelbaum’s translation, Dryden’s verse translation of the
portion of the text regarding Aeneas’ beauty reads “but far above the rest in beauty
shines/ the great Aeneas, when the troop he joins” (Dry. 202-203).
Just the word “but” alerts us the inherent comparison. Suddenly, all of the
beauty described before (including Dido’s, characterized by an excess of gold) is
placed beside the beauty of Aeneas, and deemed inferior. Additionally, Dryden’s
excessive use of gold in the passage suddenly takes on a new significance. Now, we
feel more than ever as if Dido’s finery is not noble and lofty, but futile and affected.
Dido is remarkable in the passage for her gold accessories while Aeneas is
remarkable and superior just by virtue of his own being. Suddenly, the effort is
apparent in Dido’s beauty. Aeneas does not need to try, he is.

30

Martindale 1997, 36.

44
There are also some interesting differences in the way in which Aeneas’
proximity to Dido is described. In Dryden’s verse “but far above the rest in beauty
shines /the great Aeneas, when the troop he joins” (202-203).
Aeneas’ superior beauty is shown as he “joins” “the troop.” In Mandelbaum’s
prose, “Aeneas linking his hunting band to hers” (Man. 189-190). Both joinings seem
somewhat incidental. Both use the word “join,” but Mandelbaum goes further to
reiterate the “linking” of the two. While a joining implies erasing a division, linking
alludes to a bond created between two separate entities. In addition, the word “join”
comes from the Latin word “conjungo” which means “marriage.”

45

Chapter 3- Cosmology, Pathos, Philosophy, the Hermetic Texts, and Dido

Susanna Braund writes about the issue of the philosophy and cosmic
structure of the Aeneid in her piece called “Virgil and the cosmos: religious and
philosophical ideas.”31 The intentions of the paper are clear, and the process seems
to be more “traditional” than “postmodern” in that easily identifiable features of
Virgil’s work are examined at a depth not so deep as to be anxiety-inducing. Perhaps
the most questionable aspect of the paper is the fact that it is built largely upon the
argument that Virgil cannot, in good conscience, be “pegged” to a specific
philosophical allegiance, as scholars and even lay-readers are wont to try to do, and
yet the essay is ended with the statement “Virgil’s prime allegiance is to Italy and to
Rome.”32 If the lengthy and thorough illustrations of the veritable impossibility, and
even moral dubiousness of trying to positively identify Virgil with a pre-existing
faction of philosophy and religion were drawn in order to assert that the mistake
was really just in the proposed field (geographical as opposed to philosophical) as
the starkness and placement of the concluding assertion might lead the reader to
believe, then both the proposition and the rebuttal are drained of essential vitality.

31
32

Martindale 1997, 204.
Martindale 1997, 221.

46
It is possible, I suppose, that the process of identifying someone with a region
is less problematic than placing him or his work within an intellectual or spiritual
realm. However, the language of the concluding sentence, particularly in the word
“allegiance” (221), which conjures at once allusions to politics, military, and the
fidelity of the soul, mirrors the language of the argument proclaiming the “limited
usefulness” (206) of such labels. It is also possible that the analysis up until the
proposed evidence of the concluding assertion is valid and that Braund fell prey to
the propensity of critics and, again, lay-readers alike, to mire their interpretations of
Virgil and his work in something tangible as the void of universality is always gaping
close by. Because, in the words of Braund, herself, “[the] whole issue of interpreting
Virgil as an adherent or even an advocate of particular philosophical or religious
views is closely bound up with the reception of Virgil in different places and
different eras” (206).
Braund thus seems to contradict herself in first saying that Virgil cannot be
“pegged” and then seemingly mediating this view by saying that he can, in fact, be
pegged, but that previous attempts were simply not broad enough in scope to be
valid. “Roman” or, even better, “Italian” is valid because it potentially encompasses
all of the religion and philosophy to which Virgil was exposed. Obviously this shift
from first claiming the infeasibility of the endeavor to identify and then making such
identification preferable with adjustments to the proposed “scope” is problematic. It
does, however, serve to highlight the inevitable inconsistencies that arise, even
within criticism, when dealing with Virgil; inconsistencies and confusions that can
be attributed to the mythic cloud that the suffuses the author and his work due to

47
the historical ubiquitous -ness of both, and the deep attachments that are formed
around the work; attachments that serve both to challenge impartiality and
augment further the perceived mythic nature of the author and his work.
One of the main topics of Braund’s article is the unpacking of Virgil’s cosmos,
which comprises Gods and humans and nature. Before going into the nature of these
cosmos, Braund points out that the philosophical flavor of Virgil’s views have never
been examined to the extent that they are “explicitly the subject of any single, entire
book” (204). The suggestion seems to be, then, that if Virgil’s own views can be
identified then the nature of the cosmos within his works can be more fully
understood. The issue here is that the work is essentially impossible to identify; it
resists attempts to be aligned to any one particular vein of perceptual guidelines.
Would Virgil’s work be more explicit somehow if his own beliefs were shown to be
more rooted in one vein of philosophy?
In traditional, non-literary cosmology, Alan Sandage, who is considered to be
the father of cosmology after Hubble, famously said that modern cosmology is too
concerned with the question of “why.” Cosmology can only be explained in terms of
“how”- there is no “why” to be sought because we would be unable to process any
answer as it falls under the realm of a divine knowledge and is not meant for human
understanding. This insight can be applied to many branches of inquiry. The
question of “why” can be discussed philosophically, but can never really be
answered in a way so that there will be no more questions. Similarly, Braund dances
around the idea, one with which I agree, that the reason for Virgil’s work and the

48
mystery of its significance cannot be enumerated even if his supposed, agreed upon
views were more clear.
As it stands, it is extremely difficult to put the events and actions of the
characters in the world of the book into one modern philosophical context. The
philosophy seems to be unique to the world of the book and the mishmash of
established philosophies, which results in traditionally non-denominational ethics
with echoes of traditional ethics and philosophy, in general but not in specifics,
produces a world that feels like it is not specifically and explicitly tethered to our
world but, rather, echoes many aspects of it while remaining insular and selfcontained. It is this combination of familiar and foreign that contributes to the
universal quality of the work; it is at once familiar to all and, at the same time,
fantastical and self-contained.
In fact, the philosophy of the world of the work is so difficult to identify that
the pertaining analytical literature does not take on the task of parsing it out it in
relationship to “our” world, but rather resigns itself to working within the
established framework and is “subsumed in discussions of character” (204), trying
to exemplify, for instance, stoic dimensions of Aeneas’ conduct.
Braund states that religion and philosophy in Virgil cannot be separated, as it
would be “artificial from any perspective, ancient or modern.” This is because
When we consider ‘religion’ and ‘philosophy’ in Virgil, we are always
talking about how Virgil grapples with and articulates the origins,
workings and telos (purpose) of the world and the way in which
human beings fit into that world, particularly in their behavior as

49
individuals and as members of communities towards other
individuals and communities. In other words, Gods and morality are
inextricably linked.33
Every society tries to explain through the origins and workings of the world as well
as the way that human beings fit into the world. All branches of philosophy try to do
just this. One of the employments of philosophy is as a lens through which other
works can be viewed in order to better understand them. In the case of the Aeneid,
there is a constant effort to find a lens through which the work can be fully
understood. In my research, I have never come across mention of a lens that was
able to completely put the work into focus. It could be that no modern historians or
critics have been able to compare the cosmic structure of Virgil’s Aeneid to any
existing branch of philosophy because they have not looked far back enough.
There is a collection of texts that were written by the ancient Egyptians. They
fit under the modern heading of “philosophical” because they deal with occult
science, philosophy, and, most importantly, a specific doctrine and view of the word.
These are called Hermetic Texts, and they hold the key to understanding the world
of Virgil’s Aeneid. According Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Paracelsus by
Edward Waite34, the essential philosophical Hermetic texts have six main categories:
1) The Fragment a Hermetica, which is quite literally fragments of
Hermetic writings quoted by other authors over a wide period of time

33

Martindale 1997, 205.
Although I understand that Waite is not current or particularly ‘scholarly,’ I find
him interesting and refer to his work here mainly for the purpose of his translations
of the original texts.
34

50
2) The Asclepius, also called the “Perfect Sermon” from roughly the
second or third century CE
3) The “Nag Hammadi codex,” a set of Coptic books containing three
Hermetic works, from around 350 CE
4) The Stobaei Hermetica, more fragments, compiled around 500 CE
5) The Definitions of Hermes Trismegistus for Asclepius, late sixth
century CE
6) The Corpus Hermeticum, fifteen books of Hermes, probably from the
second or third century CE
These are all dated hundreds of years after Virgil wrote the Aeneid. However, the
origins of the texts are much older and the general assumption is that “the Hermetic
body of work was based on ancient knowledge of Egypt, widely regarded as the
storehouse of antique wisdom” (Waite). One of the main tenets of the Hermetic
world view “focuses on the nature of the cosmos and mankind, especially the dual
nature of reality (lower physical reality versus the higher divine reality), and of the
rule of Fate over the lives of men and how it may be overcome, (Waite)”
The specifics of the cosmological structure as understood by the body of the
Hermetic texts are key to understanding the ontological construction of the world in
Virgil’s Aeneid, and are as follows: The world is separated into two parts, the higher
world of God, made up of the lighter elements such as air and fire, and the heavy
world of man, made up of earth and water. This is called Hermetic dualism. The
creatures of the lower world (men) were not initially given reason by God, they live
their lives “reason-less; for He did not extend the Reason to them” (Mead,
Poemandres, 9). Thus, reason only belongs to the “higher” levels of reality and the
creatures that there dwell. So, “reason” is a member of the “higher” world of God

51
and is intrinsically unknown to humans except in that it is known to exist as an
unattainable form (similar to Plato’s forms and shadows).
In the Aeneid, the ‘how’ of the world is more clearly demonstrated than the
‘why’. We know how the world in the book functions inasmuch as we are able to
witness interactions between Gods and men and interactions amongst both. The
question of why is sought out by many readers and scholars. To truly answer the
question, we cannot just define terms with other terms. The goal is to reach a truth.
It is my belief that a truth can be found in these Hermetic texts, as they seem to be a
model for the world that Virgil constructs as a stage for the events of the epic. This
world is an essential part of the work as, besides being an account of the
mythological beginnings of Rome, the unique inter-workings and constitution of the
structure of the world set it apart from all other historical accounts and facilitate
profound tension, whether within Aeneas regarding his fate and free will, or
surrounding Aeneas’ relationship to Dido, fated to fail but still begun and resulting
in true casualty of spirit.
It is the particulars of the infrastructure of the world of the book and the
questions that arise: the question of who is in charge, of why a fated path exists, the
intricacies of the dynamic between humans and Gods, the disparity between what is
known and unknown, unable to be known, spoken and unable to be spoken, that
inform the tensions of the story and allow the world to make sense within itself, to
be of a veritable construction. What informs, in turn, this very infrastructure is
wisdom that seems to have its origins or echoes in the writings of ancient Egypt,
writings which were written to explain the world and, thus, have a basis in our own

52
world as seen by ancient Egyptians. Many of the truths that they saw and
incorporated into their model of understanding can be found in Virgil’s poetic world
and, thus, the philosophy behind the world of the Aeneid is found in an examination
of Hermetic philosophy.
According to Hermetic writings, the primal form of nature is the antithesis of
light (or knowledge), thus, darkness. So, we understand that human origin is of
darkness, the antithesis of light and knowledge (knowledge known only as it is the
necessary unknown component to known). Logos, however, which is known as a
Holy Word, is sent down onto nature and, along with it, seven celestial rulers
descend to rule over different areas of matter. Thus, though the upper world and
lower world are separate and the upper is the origin of the Holy Word, Logos
pervades upon nature (ostensibly so that members of the lower world can recognize
the Holy Word if they come into contact with it). After man is created, the story goes,
he aspires to be like the Gods and desires the ability to create. This wish is granted
in some capacity; he is given creative power and limited influence upon matter, but
he “also must descend through the seven levels of reality controlled by the seven
[celestial rulers of matter that correspond to seven planets in celestial spheres of
reality] all the way to the lowest level of matter, and he takes on a characteristic of
each celestial level as he passes through. In so doing, he comes under the influence
of those spheres and their rulers, and this is the origin of the control Fate will have
on the lives of humans, and the foundation of astrology” (Waite).
From this alone, we see that the structure of truth is manifested in a physical
hierarchy. Essential to this hierarchy is the existence of an ultimate truth. This truth

53
is associated with upper regions, fire and air, and is called the Holy Word. The truth
consists of language that is Holy; divine declarations. The planets (a representation
of the physical world) are tied to the hierarchy of metaphysical truth because they
are associated with physical levels of reality. Because man is ordained into the
world of reason by his passage through these levels, and because he takes on,
through his contact with them, essential elements of the celestial levels (truths), we
see already that this world as outlined in the Hermetic texts, a seeming model for
Virgil’s, is not purely metaphysical but is rather a tapestry that is made up of both
the metaphysical the physical. Man, nature, and the Holy Word (an embodiment of
the idea of truth) are all intertwined. The interconnectedness of the philosophy
means that the physical world is in close proximity to the metaphysical world.
Human life is grounded in earth and water, distinct from the realm of air and fire,
but the upper world is tangible and grounded in that it manifests itself, physically,
by being entwined with celestial bodies.
Truth and form are interconnected and, thus, an added element of truth is
added to the philosophy itself because words aren’t just being defined by other
words; in some cases, ideas are being defined by a physical manifestation of
themselves, and the subsequent ideas and manifestations are interwoven. The
world is all inclusive in that even the unknowable, the domain of the upper regions,
is associated with something that can be found in the physical world, the elements
of air and fire, and the upper world has a place in the structure of the universe even
though it is not readily accessible to natural members of the lower world. In the
structure outlined in the Hermetic Texts, it is said that “Men call their ruling Fate”

54
(Mead, Poemandres, 11). With this we have some insight into the world of Virgil and
the interworking of God and men. Fate, then, is the name that men call that which
directs them. The undeniable force within the structure that rules is called fate. Even
more clearly, “higher reality is more mental, and has reason and power; lower
reality is physical, has no reason and is ruled by Fate. The human race has been
bound to the control of the celestial spheres.” Those are the rules of the world. That
is the “how.”
According to a character in the texts, Poemander, the process can be reversed.
Once the physical body has died, human beings can re-ascend through the levels of
reality: “When the material body is to be dissolved, first thou sirrenderest the body
by itself unto the work of change, and thys the form thou hadst doth vanish… the
body’s senses next pass back into their sources becoming separate, and resurrect as
energies; and passion and desire withdraw unto that nature which is void of reason,
and thus it is that man doth speed his way thereafter upwards through the harmony
(Mead, Poemandres, 24-25). As he ascends through the spheres, man sloughs off
human vices: the ability to wax and wane, the cunning of evil, the deception of
covetousness, overbearing boastfulness, audacity and rashness, the desire for
wealth, and the malicious lie. After all this, he is able to enter the Physis of the
Ogdiad, the eighth level of reality. Above this level, only one remains. This last and
highest level of reality is where the ultimate Intellect dwells, and it is called the
Ennead.
It seems unlikely that the similarity between “Ennead” and “Aeneid” is pure
coincidence and the possible connection is something that I am eager to further

55
explore. While the obvious connection between the Aeneid and the Hermetic texts is,
to me, fascinating, and worthy of further exploration, there is not enough space in
this specific exploration to follow the course through to a satisfying conclusion. One
of the things that is made apparent by he similarities in cosmological perception of
both the Aeneid and the Hermetic texts is the possible existence of something
profoundly specific to the human experience, and, by extension, possible evidence of
a universal human experience. Kant tells us in his Critique that unification is man’s
highest aim, and I surely fall within that tradition in seeking unity here. It is my hope,
really, that something eternal and ubiquitous does exist. If nowhere else, the
similarities between the Aeneid and the almost equally ancient Hermetic Texts seem
to show tantalizing glimmers of unity in the area of philosophy known as aesthetics;
how the collective humanity visualizes ad manifests abstraction.
Generally, nature provides aesthetic ideals. In the case of the
cosmology of the world in the Aeneid as well as in the Hermetic texts, which
manifest themselves in physical architectonics, nature does provide an ideal
in that the layers of atmosphere are appropriated to divide levels of form, but
the structure of both worlds (in the Aeneid and Hermetic texts) mirror
natural structures of our own world less so because nature provides an ideal,
and moreso because the idea behind the cosmological structure of both
worlds (in Hermetic texts and the Aeneid) is somehow maybe universal and
ideal, and thus matches up with the ideal physical structure of nature. If this
is true, then the existence of two examples so close so close to one another
seem to constitute enough evidence to support it.

56
Similarities between Virgil’s architectonic of the world of the Aeneid and the
proposed essential, aeteological, and primary structure of the universe within the
Hermetic texts suggests a unity in this area of human conception. We cannot forget
that the Aeneid was used as a reference book for many years, while the Hermetic
texts were meant to explain the world and provide answers. That both, so similar in
their internal construction of the world, were used for answers, one originally
intended more for the purpose than the other, implies further the existence of a
truth, alluring and ever-sought, sensed by ardent seekers, bundled up in the
structure.
Much of the Aeneid’s cosmology can be satisfyingly understood through a
variety of philosophical lenses. While one cannot always assert that Virgil’s
cosmology draws from specific philosophies, it is certain that even the ones
developed after Virgil’s time can be used to draw Virgil’s cosmology into many a
different focus.
The specific physical/metaphysical structure of the world in the Aeneid,
however, is astonishingly similar to the ideal one presented in the Hermetic texts.
What is refreshing about the world in the Hermetic texts is that it is anchored in
form. This, alone, makes it an obvious candidate for comparison to Virgil’s world of
the Aeneid. Philosophy rooted in form provides a sort of existential relief as it is, in
effect, tethered as opposed to existing purely in abstraction. The cosmological
makeup of the world in the Aeneid is deeply philosophical, meta-physically complex,
integral to the experiences and interactions of the characters and, in a broader sense,

57
imperative in creating a distinctive and memorable entity. We can look to the
specifics of the structure of this world for insight into the nature of the work.
In fact, as believed by Goethe and other Kantian-influenced naturalists of the
1800s, form is more solid and reliable than any analysis, naming, or definition. Each
of the former only can attempt to approach the thing. There is no substitute for the
significance of the thing. The form that philosophy takes in this example produces a
tethering effect on the entire work. It is a method of rooting abstraction not
dissimilar to Dryden’s own technique of rooting emotion and the non-physical in
color.
That the particular manifestation of this “tether” (extension and impression
of abstraction) is so similar to another, produced possibly but maybe not of a
relative proximity of time, implies, if nothing else, a profound allegiance of
perception within humanity, and also a possible degree of universality, significant
no matter how small, in humanity.
Although Goethe might disapprove, let’s delve into the structure of the world
of the Aeneid. There are definite levels of perception and existence within the world
of the Aeneid, which are rooted in a physical hierarchy of players. The mortal realm
is characterized by physical morality, although existence as shades of the
underworld follows death. Even in the underworld, though, mortals do not continue
to “live” because the physical plane of reality, the form in which humans take shape,
is essential to the classification as “alive” and “human.” In the underworld, thus,
people exist, but more so as a negative impression of something that has existed,
retained as a catalogue of the world, a metaphysical inventory, shadows left on a

58
wall after a nuclear blast. They are reminders of lives lived and evidence a
perception that time is not so much successive as it is linear and ever-compounding
upon freshly made pasts.
In the Aeneid mortals are prone to death, always in search of evidence of
their own fates, only marginally in control of their own actions but not in control of
their own destinies. Auxiliary to the Gods, they strive to achieve immortality.
Humans can be descendants of the Gods.
Gods live in a high space. They can fly and, thus, physically transcend the
more base tethers of form, they feel emotions, they are, it seems to me, conduits or
intermediary mediums through which flows a “divine mind,” for they at once know
an outcome, and, and the same instant, push actively for or against its fulfillment.
In the case of the Aeneid, the dynamic among beings of all levels is central to
the strength of the story. The greatest casualty of a fate enforced by the gods and
accepted by pious Aeneas is Dido. She has, until now, perhaps not received sufficient
attention in this paper. Her entanglement with Aeneas, however, is to me the most
compelling component of Virgil’s work and especially Dryden’s rendering as it is
achingly futile and perfectly devastating. There is something grotesque about the
annihilation of a very strong person because so much violence is needed to still a
robust body or a strong spirit. Dido is very strong, and her gradual death is all the
more grotesque and disturbing that it is brought about not by force, not in a physical
fight of any kind, but through something much more elusive and insidious. Fate
causes her heart to turn against itself- her feelings cause her to self-destruct. She is
strong and willful but entirely unprepared to defend herself against the scheme of

59
the Gods, or the very love that the Gods deliberately instilled in her for Aeneas (Juno
instructs Cupid in book 1 to take the shape of Aeneas’ son, Ascanius, and “Thyself a
boy, assume a boy’s dissembled face;/That when, amidst the fervour of the feast,/
The Tyrian hugs and fonds thee on her breast,/ And with sweet kisses in her arms
constrains,/ Thou mayest infuse thy venom in her veins” Dry. 1.960-964).
If I could analyze the entire Book 4 in this paper, I would just so that my
readers could be enticed into looking upon Dryden’s poetry. The beauty of the work
it is undermined by analysis, but it remains gracious enough to willingly submit.
What follows will be an analysis of two contrasting parts of Book 4, sections that
show the contrast between Dido’s state and that of Aeneas. I want to show, mainly,
that Dido is not “crazy” for being tormented to the point of suicide. Rather, she is
driven crazy by factors outside of herself (mainly, the scheming of the gods).
Dryden’s line 596-97, “All-powerful Love! What changes canst thou cause/ In
human hearts, subjected to thy laws.” Love can surely cause changes in the human
hearts subjected to its cause. But “all-powerful Love” is like the genetically
engineered variety- grown by the gods and distilled to its essence; this love to which
Dido is subjected wreaks havoc upon her. Dido is a true casualty of fate in that she is
utterly annihilated, in a slow and painful way, as a result of her entanglement in it.
Dido, in a state of utter torment and anguish, speaks a tirade against the Gods
when she learns that Aeneas plans to steal away from her, taking with him her peace
of mind and prospects of immortality.
Why should I fawn? What have I worse to fear?
Did he once look, or lend a listening ear,

60
Sighed when I sobbed, or shed one kindly tear?
All, symptoms of a base ungrateful mind,
So foul, that which is worse, ‘tis hard to find.

530

Of man’s injustice why should I complain?
The gods, and Jove himself, behold in vain
Triumphant treason: yet no thunder flies;
Nor Juno views my wrongs with equal eyes:
Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies!

535

Justice is fled, and truth is now no more!
I saved the shipwrecked exile on my shore:
With needful food his hungry Trojans fed:
I took the traitor to my throne and bed.
Fool that I was! ‘tis little to repeat

540

The rest: I stored and rigged his ruined fleet.
I rave, I rave! A god’s command he pleads,
And makes heaven accessory to his deeds.
Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god,
Now Hermes is employed from Jove’s abode,

545

To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state
Of heavenly powers were touched with human fate! (Dry. 526-547)
In this passage, Dido angrily laments the injustice of the gods. She sees that they
have used her as a pawn in their game to advance Aeneas. In this passage, as in
others, she is overflowing with passion and torment but has enough control over

61
her words to express herself clearly and powerfully. This is a reminder to the reader
that she is a true leader. She is fierce, well spoken, and intelligent. She is not pathetic.
The tragedy comes of her strength, strength that is wounded to self-destruction. She
is strong and willful, utterly wronged. Although she chastises herself for falling for
him in the first place, here Dido places the burden of her destruction entirely on
Aeneas for his compliance with the conspiracy of the gods. She is spirited and not
meant for such manipulation, she is self-possessed even in times of incredible
duress, she is persistent and forthright, she possesses great strength, she is not a
willing object of fate.
In the beginning of her speech, Dido recalls Aeneas’ behavior when their
relationship was the best. She remembers his coldness towards her and his lack of
empathy. A worse man than him, she says, would be hard to find. This anger comes
only after earnest pleading and attempts to reach his heart. At this point, Dido is
angry and frustrated. Gods and men have been against her and now she is aware of
the plot. “The gods, and Jove himself, behold in vain/ Triumphant treason: yet no
thunder flies” (Dry. 532-533).
Aeneas, in leaving her and claiming that her love for him is unreciprocated,
her expectations unjust, commits a kind of “triumphant treason” (533) because the
gods sanction his infractions. Jove and all the rest watch from their perches at Dido’s
unjust treatment, but no one comes to her aid; there are no thunderbolts, objects
thrown from the higher reaches to the middle realm, meant to traverse the barrier
between god and man, warnings to signal moral breaches. The rules do not apply to
Aeneas and his actions; Dido’s treatment goes unpunished. Everything is against

62
Dido. Aeneas has done wrong by her, but he implicates heaven. “Faithless is earth,
and faithless are the skies!/ Justice is fled, and truth is now no more!” (Dry. 535536).
Here, Dido has lost all faith in her world. It may be this that truly drives her
to her death. She has lost faith in justice, truth and beauty. She has been utterly
wronged. Later, closely following her tirade, “Abruptly here she stops; then turns
away/ Her loathing eyes, and shuns the sight of day” (Dry. 562). Dido here has given
up, seeing that she cannot win, that she is bereft. She stops abruptly, as if she
suddenly realizes the futility of trying to persuade either Aeneas of the Gods who
rule her fate. Her eyes are loathing, disdainful of everything in their sight. Suddenly,
her world loses meaning. Even the sight of day is loathsome to her now. With this
ultimate betrayal of fate and Aeneas, she no longer trusts in the world or finds
comfort in living. “The wretched Queen, pursued by cruel fate/Begins at length the
light of heaven to hate” (653). The last part of Dido’s tirade illuminates her
perspective on the cosmology of the world, on her and Aeneas’ separate fates.
Dryden’s lines,
I rave, I rave! A god’s command he pleads,
And makes heaven accessory to his deeds.
Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god,
Now Hermes is employed from Jove’s abode,

545

To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state
Of heavenly powers were touched with human fate! (542-547).

63
To Dido, Aeneas shirks both love and honor. He is committing the highest treason
and, worse, his actions are being sanctioned by the Gods. She calls the gods out by
name, especially the most directly intervening, Hermes and Jove, as if challenging
them to come forth from behind their cloudy shields and confront her. Although she
is wracked with pain from a love inflicted upon her by the Gods, “Despair, and rage,
and love, divide her heart;/Despair and rage had some, but love the greater part”
(Dryden 772). The gods do not engage with her and prefer to stand by until the
storm passes, so to speak. They know that her emotions are dangerous and threaten
to undermine Aeneas’ fated course. Mercury, in fact, has to visit Aeneas for a second
time to usher him to go. As his argument, Mercury paints Dido as a pesky, crazy
woman.
She harbours in her heart a furious hate
(and thou shalt find the dire effects too late),
Fixed on revenge, and obstinate to die.Haste swiftly hence, while thou hast power to fly!
…
Who knows what hazards thy delay may bring?
Woman’s a various and a changeful thing. (Dryden 810-819)
In Hermes’ message there is no acknowledgement of the pain that leads Dido to
want to die, only a characterization of obstinacy, as if her death were a political
move and something ignoble and calculated. Mercury paints Aeneas’ fate as being a
shared goal (of Aeneas and the gods) and Dido as being threatening to it, not in an
emotional capacity but rather in a potentially physical one. At once Mercury de-

64
emphasizes Aeneas’ propensity to be influenced by emotion, therefore priming him
for the mindset of “men have to do what they have to do” and also paints Dido as
unappealing and almost dangerous, but mostly just irritating. The danger is
potentially eminent as the gods know that Aeneas may be thinking twice about his
decision to leave, but Mercury frames the potential “hazards” of delay as being
specific to feminine wiles and, thus, undermines their potency.
Back to the end of the tirade:
I rave, I rave! A god’s command he pleads,
And makes heaven accessory to his deeds.
Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god,
Now Hermes is employed from Jove’s abode,

545

To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state
Of heavenly powers were touched with human fate! (542-547)
When Dido says “I rave, I rave!” she seems to be anticipating the response of those
not on her side to her words. This is in ironic contrast to the next part of her speech,
“…A god’s command he pleads,/ And makes heaven accessory to his deeds” (542543).
The effect here is that we see the insanity of the situation. Dido is “raving”
(542) for feeling wronged, and yet Aeneas is perfectly sane when he claims that his
actions are right because he is backed by the Gods. Justice has been completely
inverted from Dido’s point of view, and we see this clearly by the juxtaposition of
claims. Aeneas is the center of the universe, it seems, in that all of the powers
configure to support his advancement. Even Hermes is at Aeneas’ disposal as his

65
personal messenger. This is astounding to Dido; she is suddenly bereft on all sides,
conspired against by not only Aeneas, but by the greater fabric of the universe,
which devotes itself to his advancement.
In all of the above examples, I analyzed Dryden’s translation and not the
original Latin text. Dryden’s translation is effusively sympathetic to Dido. Dryden
portrays her as the central focus of this part of the story, the one with the most
conflict and the most tragic situation. This cannot be said, however, for Virgil’s
original Latin text. Following, I will compare passages of the Latin with Dryden’s
English to show the shift in sympathies between each work, to show that Dryden’s
rendering is, in fact, slightly unusual in that it portrays Dido with so much care.
It seems to me that Dryden favors Dido while Virgil’s sympathies lie more
with Aeneas. While I see Aeneas as less deserving of this sympathy because of his
hostility towards Dido, critic and translator RG Austin argues for leniency toward
Aeneas and cites his deep inner conflict, not indifference, as the cause of his
behavior. Aeneas’ speech near the middle of Book 4 is the closest that he comes to
giving an explanation to Dido regarding his plans to leave her. His speech ends with
the words Italiam non sponte sequor (Aen. 361). This basically means, “I do not
follow my free will to Italy.”35 Austin translates it as “I go to Italy, against all my
heart” (Aus. 105). While Dryden renders it, “Forced by my fate, I leave your happy
land” (Dry. 517). So, while Dryden emphasizes the fated aspect of Aeneas’ actions,
he does not indicate (in this line, anyway) an overt emotional conflict of interest.

35

Author’s translation.

66
Earlier, in line 482, Dryden indicates a “heaving in his heart,” but even that is
mediated by a somewhat ambivalent reference to “Jove’s command” (481).
It is unclear, then, whether Dryden’s Aeneas has a true fissure within himself
marking a clear divide between his will and his fate while Virgil’s words can be
easily interpreted, as they are overtly by Austin, to indicate a decided conflict of
interest between Aeneas’ fate and own personal free will. In the case of Austin’s
translation, Aeneas is sympathetic suddenly because he references his own heart.
This aligns him with Dido, suggesting that they have each been put in different
situations, but that their lots are similar in that they are equally helpless to alter the
fate that they have been cast.
Austin in his commentary quotes critic T.E. Page as saying “not all Virgil’s art
can make the figure of Aeneas here appear other than despicable.”36 This is a view
that I tend to agree with after having read Dryden’s rendering, but it is one against
which Austin argues, “[Page’s comment] is to ignore all the undertones of the
speech… It is unfair, and it is untrue.”37 Austin maintains that Aeneas’ coldness is not
out of animosity or indifference but in line with his logical way of reacting to
situations in comparison to Dido’s emotional response. It is also, he says, a
classically Roman way of reacting to conflict. Austin says, “He [Aeneas] does not
disguise the dark and brutal truth, that she [Dido] has deceived herself, he has not
deceived her.”38 Austin continues on to suggest that Aeneas’ rigid tone was adopted
to prevent his own “break down.” Austin, “It is no fault of Virgil’s that the harsh

36

Austin, RG. 1973, 105
Austin, RG. 1973, 105
38 Austin, RG. 1973, 105
37

67
conflict between duty and desire is what it is… it is our pity that we should give him
[Aeneas], not our scorn.”39
Aeneas certainly is up against a wall when it comes to his fate, but he takes
responsibility for it because he seems to internalize it and make it his own will. He
does not outwardly hesitate when ordered by Jove via Mercury to leave Dido. In fact,
he is instantly petrified and set on going. As soon as Mercury delivers his message
and flies away, Aeneas has a violent reaction. The knowledge of his fate was
internalized but suppressed and, upon being reminded of it, his entire physical
being is petrified by the power of the resurgent force.
tali Cyllenuis ore locutus
mortalis visus medio sermone reliquit
et procul in tenuem ex oculis evanuit auram.
At vero Aeneas aspectu obmutuit amens,
arrectaeque horrore comae et vox faucibus haesit. 280
ardet abire fuga dulcisque relinquere terras,
attonitus tanto monitu imperioque deorum. (Aen. 276-282)
Below, a translation of the above passage by David West:
No sooner had these words passed the lips of the Cyllenian god than
he disappeared from mortal view and faded far into the insubstantial
air. But the sight of him left Aeneas dumb and senseless. His hair
stood on end with horror and the voice stuck in his throat. He longed
to be away and leave behind him this land he had found so sweet. The

39

Austin, RG. 1973, 106

68
warning, the command from the gods, had struck him like a
thunderbolt” (West 77).
All at once, three things happen in quick succession and almost simultaneously:
Mercury finishes speaking, Mercury disappears, Aeneas is petrified. The message is
so powerful that as soon as it’s spoken Aeneas is affected. Aeneas is left obmutuit
amens (279), “speechless and out of his senses.”40 Like the way his senses are
confounded when Anna pleads with him on Dido’s behalf, here Aeneas is left
completely disoriented, unable to perceive the outside world, able to feel nothing
but the numbing reverberations that result from the massive impact of the message
delivered by Mercury. In the same way that Catullus is able to hear nothing but the
ringing of his own ears (Catullus 51, 7-12), or Sappho is made blind and dumb by
the presence or even the intimation of the beloved (Sappho 9-12), here Aeneas is
incapacitated by the overwhelming force of the message relayed to him. So
profoundly does the message affect him that his body is made useless and he is as if
attonitus (282), “thunderstruck.” The symbolism here is apparent once we
remember that Zeus’ powers include dominion over thunder and that the hurling of
thunderbolts is something that he is wont to do. So Aeneas is left bereft of
discerning senses and feels the residual firebrand of a thunderbolt. After the visit,
Aeneas’ own tools of perception are wiped out and all that resides there is an
intimation of Godly power.
The “warning that strikes like a thunderbolt” is really more than a “warning”
if we look to the Latin. The word monitu (282), which by West is translated as

40

Author’s trans

69
“warning,” means at once “admonition, or warning” but also “oracle or omen”
(Lewis). This other connotation cements the “warning” as being an extension of the
prophecy that Aeneas is fated to fulfill. Zeus’ message, carried and delivered by
Mercury, is not just a warning or admonition (although it is both of those) but is also
a nudge in the direction of the fated path. The message is an active admonition as it
deliberately redirects Aeneas’ course into alignment with that which has been
prophesized and must be fulfilled. No sooner than it is delivered, Aeneas’ own will is
changed. Suddenly, he ardet abire fuga dulcisque relinquere terras (281), “burned to
go away and flee the land he had once found so sweet.”41 The word ardet (281) is
the kind of burning that is often associated with passionate love and the parallel that
this word casts by its placement here is of great significance: with the same intensity
of the burning love that he may have once felt for Dido, and which she certainly feels
for him, Aeneas now wishes to be far away from Carthage. Because of Aeneas’ piety,
his willingness to accept his fate, he is the perfect vessel for the Gods. He adheres to
their will above all others, and for this Dido cannot forgive him.
Although Austin is far more proficient in Latin and in Virgil’s work than am I,
I do not agree with Austin’s point of view in saying that Dido is more responsible
than Aeneas for her being deceived. It is entirely clear to me that Dido is not at fault
for her situation. She, as we have established, was used and discarded by the gods in
order to advance Aeneas. Her love for him, even, was masterminded and caused by
the actions of the gods. I could concede that Dido is in a similar position as Aeneas in
that they are both being manipulated, to some degree, by fate. However, there is a

41

Author’s trans.

70
glaring difference between their respective experiences: “pious” Aeneas knew of
and accepted his fate. Although he struggled at times with the implications of his
cooperation, he was an informed participant. The instant after each reminder from
Mercury, Aeneas sprung into action. Dido, on the other hand, was purely and
unjustly used and without her own knowledge or assent. Furthermore, Aeneas was
able to accept his fate because it promised immortality and fame for himself and his
descendants. Dido’s entanglement with fate and the gods promised no such thing. In
contrast, her involvement with Aeneas took away her only chance of immortality
qua sola sidera adibam (Aen. 4.322).
There is one more stark difference between interpretations of Virgil’s Latin
that we will explore, this one on the topic of the marriage between Dido and Aeneas.
Originally, Venus sends Cupid to Carthage to make Dido fall in love with Aeneas to
keep him (Aeneas) from harm. Venus hopes that by aligning Dido with Aeneas, she
(Venus) will be able to usurp control of the queen from Juno and thus lessen the
possibility that Aeneas is further tormented.
As soon as Cupid enters the palace disguised as Ascanius and meets Dido,
Dido’s love for Aeneas is born.
Praecipue infelix, pesti devota futurae,
expleri mentem nequit ardescitque tuendo
Phoenissa, et pariter puero donisque movetur, (Aen. Book 1, 712)

71
But most of all the unfortunate Dido, doomed to be the victim of a plague that
was yet to come, could not have her fill of gazing, and as she gazed, moved by
the boy as much as by the gifts, the fire within her grew. (Austin).
Dido is doomed or fated to endure pain and, ultimately, death as a result of her
unrequited love for Aeneas. Her love has been ordained by Venus and ensured by
Cupid. She is sacrificed for the sake of Aeneas and, eventually, Rome. Her feelings of
love are true and deeply felt, but they are pushed into being by the work of the gods.
Venus sends Cupid to Carthage for the express reason of kindling love in the breast
of Dido. Dido’s love acts as a buffer for Aeneas from Juno’s hurtful intentions.
Later, Juno claims to concede to Venus and suggests that Dido and Aeneas
marry. Venus sees this is a ploy to raise Carthage to greater power but agrees
because it keeps her in control of the union. While Ardet amans Dido traxitque per
ossa furorem (Aen.101), “Dido is ablaze with love and has drawn her passion
through and through her frame” (Austin 53), feeling her passion so acutely and
deeply that it penetrates her very bones, the next stage of the union is plotted.
Diffugient comites et nocte tegentur opaca:/ speluncam Dido dux et Troianus eandem
devenient (Aen. 123), “Their companions will scatter for shelter and be enwrapped
in impenetrable darkness; but Dido and the hero of Troy will reach a cave together”
(Austin 57). It is masterminded by the two Gods and carried out with the accuracy
that can come only from something that has been preordained. From this point on,
Dido begins her descent. ille dies primus leti primusque malorum/ causa fuit (Aen.
169), “that day in the beginning was the cause of death, that day in the beginning
was the cause of sorrow” (Austin 69).

72
It is clear, then, that the “marriage” was arranged. Even though Dido herself
only calls it a “marriage” to legitimize their union,
No longer made a secret of her love,
But called it marriage; by that specious name
To veil the crime, and sanctify the shame. (Dryden 248),
Aeneas, himself, never seems to object to acting as a unit with Dido and upon being
visited by Mercury is even seen wearing all sorts of fineries, gifts from Dido, and
working on rebuilding her city. It seems then that Aeneas was in perfect accordance
with Dido, leading her to believe by actions if not words that he returned her
feelings. This was the case until the moment he was reminded to leave. For this
reason, I maintain that he deceived her and that Dido had reason to believe in his
fidelity to her.
In the portion of Aeneas’ speech regarding marriage, he seems cruel and
flippant in Dryden’s rendering,
I never hoped a secret flight from hence
Much less pretended to the lawful claim
Of sacred nuptials, or a husband’s name (Dryden 488-490),
In Dryden’s version, Aeneas is saying that he never hoped to leave undetected. This
could be interpreted as being more insulting than anything as it is like he’s saying
that he never wanted to steal away and thus save her the pain of watching him go. It
is as if he is saying that Dido’s feelings did not matter enough for him to try to
protect them, and her outrage and hurt are unwarranted because her feelings for
him are unreciprocated and unprecedented. Referring to the lawful claim as

73
something “pretended” is another insult, suggesting that Dido is of unsound mind to
pretend that they were married. Earlier, however, Dryden’s verse intimates that
Aeneas and Dido are in accordance with one another. In Dryden’s verse,
The lustful pair in lawless pleasure drowned
Lost in their loves, insensible of shame
And both forgetful of their better fame. (323-325)
So it is clear in Dryden’s rendering that Dido’s expectations of Aeneas are not
unfounded, since they are shown here in lines 323-325 to be in a shared
circumstance.
Austin renders the same portion of Aeneas’ speech, “It was no bridegroom’s
torch that I ever held before me, it was no bond of this kind to which I came” (Austin
103).
Here, Aeneas is straight forward and unemotional, but not insulting. He is
stating the facts: that they were never legally married. He does not insinuate,
however, as he seems to in Dryden’s version, that Dido is deranged on some level for
acting as if they were. The Latin of this section is …nec coniugis umquam/ Praetendi
taedas aut haec in foedera veni (Aen. 338), which can be roughly translated to mean,
“never did I hold out the marriage torch, nor agree to enter into marriage.”42
It is clear then that Virgil’s Latin can be interpreted in a variety of ways.
Dryden seems to give Dido the most sympathy and, thus, readers of his rendering
might see Dido in a more empathetic way. Austin maintains about this section that it
shows “in Dido, desire could always deceive duty, in Aeneas, desire could never win

42

Author’s trans

74
the last battle.”43 I value Austin’s commentary but I disagree with him in this
instance. Yes, Dido and Aeneas are similar in that they are both ruled by fate, but
Austin characterizes Dido here as if it is one of her characteristics that her emotions
(desire) come before duty. We saw in the beginning of Book 4 her struggle against
her burgeoning feelings.44 It is clear to me that her instincts were to ignore them.
She is a powerful leader, strong and smart. It is not a character flaw but a curse put
deliberately upon her by the gods that causes her to be so singularly minded in her
desire. Compounding her monomania is the skewed nature of the cosmos; she is
astounded at the injustice of the fact that all assistance and support goes to Aeneas
and leaves her, used up, a discarded vessel. Aeneas puts duty before desire, yes, but
it is partially because he has been fated to do so and partially because he is
promised great reward by accepting his fate. Possible immortality is a clear winner
when pit against the fleeting promise of desire. Dido, herself, may not have forgone
immortality it if she hadn’t been up against the power of a fated love.

43

Austin, RG. 1973,108
Sed mihi vel tellus optem prius ima dehiscat/vel pater omnipotens abigat me
fulmine ad umbras/pallentis umbras Erebo noctemque profundam/ante, pudor, quam
te volio aut tua iura resolvo (Aen.4.24-27). “but I would make this my earnest prayer,
either that earth may soon yawn open to its depths for me, or that the Father (who
can do all things) may blast me with his bolt and hurl me to the world of shadows, to
the pale-glimmering shadows in Hell, to the pit of the night, sooner than that I do
hurt my conscience or loosen its binding laws” (Austin 31).
44

75

Conclusion

I hope that I have shown the complexities of translation both from the
perspective of the translator and the greater academic or literary canon, and I hope
that I have shown the privileged position of the Aeneid specifically within this canon.
In a more metaphysical sense, I hope that I have coherently explored at best a small
portion of the cosmological, philosophical, and otherwise inherent structure of the
world inside the Aeneid. Lastly, I wish with early care to have illuminated the inner
subjectivities, upon which depend some of the greater overarching themes of the
work, of Aeneas but mostly Dido who, to me, has become a casualty of fate both
inside and outside the confines of the book.
Dido is so often misunderstood, her anguish mistaken for rage, (Dryden line
772, “Despair, and rage, and love, divide her heart;/Despair and rage had some, but
love the greater part.”) her utter torment taken out of context, seen as a character
flaw rather than the result of a long and uninvited despair. She is sometimes
remembered for her tatters instead of her beauty (Dryden’s line 434 “Frantic with
fear, impatient of the wound/and impotent of mind, she roves the city round.”), her
broken-ness instead of her strength. It is, in fact, her sturdiness, heartiness, power,
that gives significance to her final dissolution. Her fall is profound and though she
struggles to fight, her strength is matched. The annihilation of Dido represents a
force utterly violent and destructive, unaware of its effect on individual lives. This is
the force to which she must succumb. This is fate.

76
Dido’s insanity, torment, death, is not of her own doing. All are illustrations of
the comparative power of fate, of which Dido is the ultimate casualty. It is my belief
that because writing about Dido often considers her only in her last, utterly wrecked
state, she has become a casualty of academia as well as of Fate. If I could, I would
like to write about Dido more than I have here.
***

With many avenues left to explore and only a brief tract covered of a
seemingly endless expanse, we are left with many considerations. We have analyzed
Dryden’s re-rendering of Virgil’s original, compared it to the original and other
translations, considered the political and philosophical implications of translation,
evaluated the cosmology and philosophy of the world of the Aeneid, and weighed the
value of pathos within the work. This critical eye is required for a true analysis of
the work. However, I do not wish to present the world and characters of the work as
if they are stagnant or purely symbolic. The most valuable thing to me about the
Aeneid is that it is dynamic, vibrant, alive. Dido and Aeneas are characters dear to
me, and I analyze them with the knowledge that they submit gracefully to analysis
but are not meant to be analyzed with a cold, gunmetal eye. The value of the work
can be inferred through analysis, but really goes beyond it. This work, the Aeneid,
brought catharsis, transcendence, immersion to me. It has a continuous value not
only as a canonized work with a cemented place at the helm of academia, but as the
fruit of a magnificent labor. It is a breathtaking piece of art and literature. Although
it must, for academic purposes, be here critically analyzed, its patho-tic quality, its

77
propensity to affect readers emotionally, its ability to burrow itself, for technical
reasons previously explored and metaphysical reasons that are better felt, is its
most apparent source of power and, whether or not acknowledged by the greater
academia, is the reason that it flourishes today.
The Aeneid is a seminal work in the creative fruits of humanity. Through it,
modern readers become part of a tradition with its roots firmly planted thousands
of years ago. To me, the greatest translation is by John Dryden. It is my hope that
people will read it for more than the awe that its name can confer. Philosopher
Walter Benjamin said about creative works, “The instant the criterion of
authenticity ceases to be applicable to artistic production, the total function of art is
reversed. Instead of being based on ritual, it begins to be based on another practice
– politics. Works of art are received and valued on different planes. Two polar types
stand out; with one, the accent is on the cult value; with the other, on the exhibition
value of the work”45
I would like for this work, The Aeneid, to be valued for more than its
exhibition value. I would like Dido to be appreciated and loved as more than a cult
figure, reduced to a certain tidy history, and a set of characteristics. The Aeneid is a
dynamic, vibrant work that is deeply fulfilling when read in earnest; my love for it is
deep and ever growing.

45

Benjamin 1936, Part IV

78

Bibliography

Austin, RG. P. Vergili Maronis Aeneidos Liber Quartus. IV. London: University Press,
Oxford, 1973. Print.
Benjamin, Walter. "Berkowitz - Educational Pages." Berkowitz - Educational Pages.
N.p., n.d. Web. 23 Apr. 2012. <http://www.berk
edu.com/VisualStudies/readingList/06b_benjaminwork%20of%20art%20in%20the%20age%20of%20mechanical%20reproduction.
pdf
>.
Catullus. “XI.” Catullus the Complete Poems. Trans. Guy Lee. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1990. Print.
Dryden, John. Virgil’s Aeneid. London: Wordsworth Editions Ltd, 1997. Print.
Lewis, CT. Elementary Latin Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1889. Print.
Mandelbaum, Allen. Virgil’s Aeneid. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971.
Print.
Martindale, Charles, ed. Cambridge Companion to Virgil. Cambridge: University of
Cambridge, 1997. Print.
Marvell, Andrew. "To His Coy Mistress." 1650.
Mead, George Robert Stow. Studies in Hellenistic theosophy and gnosis: being a
translation of the extant sermons and fragments of the Trismegistic literature with
Prolegomena, commentaries and notes, by G. R. S. Mead,.... London: J. M. Watkins,
1964. Print.
Ovid, Apollo and Daphne. < http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Daphne_and_Apollo>
Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012. Web. 16 Apr 2012.

79

Sappho. "Fragment 31." If Not, Winter: Fragments of Sappho. Anne Carson. Knopf,
2002. Print.
"Sappho: Poem of Jealousy." Bureau of Public Secrets. Bureau of Public Secrets, n.d.
Web. 19 Apr 2012. <http://www.bopsecrets.org/gateway/passages/sappho.htm>.
Waite, Arthur. Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Paracelcus. 1. Chicago: de
Laurence, Scott & co, 1910. Print.
West, David Alexander. The Aeneid. London, England: Penguin Books, 1990. Print.

