Bard College

Bard Digital Commons
Senior Projects Spring 2012

Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects

2012

On Going A Journey Through The Works of
Virginia Woolf
Laura Lewis-Mckeon
Bard College

Recommended Citation
Lewis-Mckeon, Laura, "On Going A Journey Through The Works of Virginia Woolf " (2012). Senior Projects Spring 2012. Paper 3.
http://digitalcommons.bard.edu/senproj_s2012/3

This Access restricted to On-Campus only is brought to you for free and
open access by the Bard Undergraduate Senior Projects at Bard Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Senior Projects Spring
2012 by an authorized administrator of Bard Digital Commons. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@bard.edu.

On Going A Journey Through The Works of Virginia Woolf

Senior Project submitted to
The Division of Languages and Literature
of Bard College
by
Laura Lynn Lewis McKeon

Annandale-on-Hudson, New York
May 2012

To Jason K. Lewis and Elizabeth Frank:
One for leaving me with a
forever wandering imagination,
and the other for teaching me to accept it.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project would not have been possible without the guidance and assistance from
many individuals who have donated, in their own personal ways, sincerely appreciated
contributions.
I thank Elizabeth Frank, who not only gave me the confidence to follow the windings of
my mind, but also spent countless hours trying to figure out how I could communicate
them. I do not know how to articulate it any more sincerely, but working with you has
been a true delightful.
I also thank Jeff Katz for lighting the match that sparked the flame, so to speak, which
began my interest in literary studies. Joan Retallack, for serving as my primary advisor
and for providing the perfect balance of both guidance and freedom.
Lastly, to my Mother (the true Einstein), my Father (the historian), Verda (the pretty
lady), Donald (the uncle), and Kimberly (the slice)—thank you, too. And, who could
forget, my boyfriend (the dog).

PREFACE
The soul of a journey is liberty, perfect liberty, to think, feel, do, just as one pleases. We
ourselves behind much more than to get rid of others. It is because I want a little
breathing-space to muse on indifferent matters, where Contemplation
May plume her feathers and let grow her wings,
That in the various bustle of resort
Were all too ruffled, and sometimes impair'd,
—Milton, "Comus," 378-380
that I absent myself from the town for a while, without feeling at a loss the moment I am
left by myself.
(William Hazlitt, ‘On Going A Journey’)
This project is written in the style it is trying to describe: the ineffable drive
Virginia Woolf had to “zigzag” in her texts. While she wishes to convey Laurence
Sterne’s “preference for the windings of his own mind to the guide-book and its
hammered high road” (‘The Sentimental Traveller’ 409), his seemingly aimless narrative
ramblings also throw into relief Woolf’s own fears with formlessness in their shared
endeavor to paradoxically encapsulate “wonderfully prolific” real life, which “passes
through such strange places and along with it a train of adventures…” (‘Sterne’ 281).
When reading Woolf’s works, one must pursue a journey with an author who is not
entirely comfortable with her own mental map; she wishes to communicate life, yet is not
entirely comfortable with serving it a certain way. Furthermore, her critical essays serve
as supplements for the traveler to learn from. They provide helpful insights that
illuminate understanding in her fiction. Only when one takes a step back from her works,
allows them to blend together, will the puzzle-piece-map begin to take shape. One must
be warned, however, that a zigzag will appear.
With William Hazlitt’s and Laurence Sterne’s help, this project embarks on an
uncharted journey through Woolf’s works. No map or table of contents is provided.

1

POINT OF DEPARTURE
Before going on a journey the question of a guide-book naturally suggests itself. Your
need is not altogether simple, and, though many profess to supply it, few, when put to the
test, are found to succeed.
(Virginia Woolf, ‘Journeys in Spain’)

Reading Woolf’s fictional work is like going on a journey, as William Hazlitt
famously put it, through the high mountains of discontinuity and consciousness. Woolf’s
novels suggest that for one to read her work, one must be transformed into a sympathetic
companion who has the “perfect liberty” to think and feel a certain way, yet must follow
a meticulously mapped narrative terrain; feelings and sentiments may run freely, but only
within the landscape and time frame the author provides. Woolf wishes for her readers to
un-pack her text, disassemble what one thinks of a “conventional” literary category, to
only re-pack it for assembly and shipment. Readers must strip away conventional
categories in order to access Hazlitt’s “breathing space” that is synonymous to a freeing
of the mind. She opens space and time through the very act of writing, which journeys
away from a conventional, mimetic mode of representation and discovers an abstract
mode of representation that she envisioned would create the proper illustration of
emotion. In doing so, she declares her independence from tradition. Time and place
become suggestive forces that limit her novels and prevent the spilling of interiority from
splattering all over the pages; the two concepts are buffers against an unmapped route
taking charge, which would inevitably lead the unsympathetic reader into narrative noman’s land.
Woolf’s fiction is composed with sudden shifts and changes in direction,
suggesting an author who zigzagging towards a new type of novelistic endeavor. While

2
her language is primarily evoked on late nineteenth century early modern poetics, her
form is entirely unique with its zigzag shape, refuting definition, being indefinable and
ineffable. Her narrative style is swift; condensed and compressed, fussily worded and
punctuated. Yet even so, it suggests layers of meaning. It is indicative of the movement
of a mental process through space and time that not concerned with consistency, but
rather interested in mobility. Her process is that of intense volatility. As readers, when
we reach a point of closure, we are forces to seize the opportunity, not so much out of
being bored, but because of being out of breath. One will wish to reflect upon the
“propriety, after all, of using the word adventure” (‘The ‘Movie’ Novel’ 290), or journey,
but has little time to do so. Having no idea what is to become of Woolf’s characters
when they speed off towards the end of their novel-space, readers are left wondering if
they, too, are to do the same.

ITINERARY
He is, after all, telling a story, pursuing a journey, however arbitrary and zigzag his
methods.
(Virginia Woolf, ‘A Sentimental Journey’).
Woolf’s essays on Sterne display her discontent with fiction’s formal narrative and
exhibit her ambivalence towards his expansiveness of character and form. She is both
excited and anxious that he leaps formal boundaries – “the thick-set hedge of English
prose” (‘Sterne’ 281) – that she herself tentatively zigzags over in her own works. Woolf
also appropriates Sterne’s frequent tropes of travelling throughout her analyses, a
metaphor that traverses the terrain of both writers’ products and processes:
he touches upon the emotion, and passes on to show us how it travels through
his mind, and what associations cling to it; different ideas meet and disperse,

3
naturally as it seems; and the whole scene is lit for the moment with air and
colour.
(‘Sterne’ 285)
It is because of Sterne’s particular process that he is able to create his particular product.
Sterne’s process demands that an active mind be present in order to gather the various
“associations,” or images and symbols, that “meet and disperse” within the text. He is
aware of how emotion is processed in the mind, and curiously seeks a method that will be
able to demonstrate and encapsulate the flux feeling of when associations rapidly come
and go.
Woolf sees Sterne distributing himself far and wide, gliding over feeling and
gathering sentiments like trinkets of travel, only to scatter them again through his freeflowing form. Sterne’s narrative exertions are configured as an invigorating walk that
“opens the heart[…and]forces the blood[…]to run freely” (Tristram Shandy 303) through
characters’ expanded consciousnesses, much like how Woolf “opens” the novel by
unpacking it, always, however, for the sole purpose of repacking it when the journey
concludes. While Sterne travels light on his dashes, tripping from one clause and through
to the next, Woolf is burdened by the long dash creating the weight and awkwardness of
individual phrases. She admires Sterne’s seemingly unmapped routes, but is herself
preoccupied with the need to “enclose the whole, and shape infinite strange shapes”
(Letters I), aware of the strict formal decorum of eighteenth and nineteenth century
literature forbears, mimicked most closely in her first novel, the grand narrative Night
and Day.
Woolf is, then, a sympathetic critic in the Hazlittean sense: Sterne is the “distant
object” (‘Why distant objects please’, 1822) that excites her interest but requires an act of
exertion to fully engage with. Sterne’s contemporary Adam Smith argues in The Theory

4
of Moral Sentiments (1975) that “sympathy” is a working of the “imagination” that
“[carries] us beyond our own person” (9), placing the author and reader alike in the dual
role of participant-observer. Sympathy moves beyond being singular and becomes a dual
participant role. Paradoxically, sympathy is an ‘organic’ unconscious identification with
another and a conscious imaginative exertion. Hazlitt suggests that it is the imagination’s
voyage, or zigzag, between subject and object rather than the destination that comprises
the process of sympathy:
It is not the[…]glimmering[…]speck in the distance that rivets our attention…it
is the interval that separates us from it, and of which it is the trembling
boundary[…]we imagine all sort of adventures in the interim.
(‘Why Distant Objects Please’ 358)
The movement from subject to object revises the former, synonymous to Woolf’s
essays on Sterne being read as a reworking of her own authorial purpose. The
uncharted territory between Sterne and Woolf is analogous to the unstable
reciprocity, or “trembling boundary”, between writer and reader, with character and
form zigzagging back and forth between them. While “sympathy” is an immediate
reception of sensations during the walk or journey, “sentimentality” as considered
reflection is what the traveler takes home. Both Sterne and Woolf require sympathy
from themselves and the reader as fuel for the journey, while sentiment harvests that
sympathy when one looks over the travelogue, distanced from the experience itself.
The imagination that takes place within this moment of separation can be
seen in Mrs. Dalloway when Clarissa peers outside her window and watches her
neighbor moving. Once the woman moves beyond her peripheral vision, Clarissa
begins to imagine what the woman is doing, literally making it up as she goes along.
Clarissa, one could argue, takes pleasure in observing the woman because of the

5
fantasy she is allowed to create because of the distance the two have between one
another; she can, in a sense, ‘know’ and ‘believe, how ever false the premise is.
There is no shared sympathy because Clarissa has never even met her neighbor; her
musings are pure fantasy.
Woolf is attuned to Hazlitt’s concept of necessary distance between the self
and the object of sympathy, for if one places oneself in the position of another “we
might perhaps dissolve utterly” (DIII, 97). Woolf and Sterne thus struggle to
reconcile narrative journeying as a project for both the artist and critic, roles they
zigzag between: the touristic pleasure of a meandering, flee-flowing novelist style
must be checked by the travel critic’s strictures of form and propriety. The desire to
wander unimpeded carries with it the risk of getting lost in narrative’s no-man’s
land, in turn leaving the unsympathetic reader behind; Woolf in particular is so
ambivalent about her narrative wandering because formal waywardness would
enable verisimilitude, mimetically enacting psyches that amble through conscious
and unconscious planes.
Sterne more readily relishes and advertises the participant-observer dialectic,
exploiting it as a humorous disjunction. His seemingly disarming spontaneous style
is, though, a form of self-defense, dramatizing his critical obligations in the text as a
way of pre-empting and rebutting criticism outside of it: in a siege, zigzag formation
protects against enfilading by the enemy. When Orlando is first drafted as “a
writer’s holiday,” to be written “at the top “of her “speed,” Woolf feels “the need of
an escapade” and wishes “to kick up [her] heels and be off” (DIII 177); in effect,
Woolf is parading her very difference as a writer of fiction, suggesting, perhaps, that

6
she never even had the confidence or desire to write a traditional nineteenth-century
novel.

EXCESS BAGGAGE:
The Word/Phrase (and narrative device) “Zigzag”
DEFINITION:
1. Noun: a line, course, or progression characterized by sharp turns first to one side and
then to the other; one of a series of such turns, as in a line of path.
2. Adjective: proceeding or formed in a zigzag: What beautiful zigzag stitches!
3. Adverb: with frequent sharp turns from side to side; in a zigzag manner: The child ran
zigzag along the beach.
4. Verb (used with object): to make (something) zigzag, as in form or course; move or
maneuver (something) in a zigzag direction: They zigzagged their course to confuse the
enemy.
5. Verb (used without an object): to proceed in a zigzag line or course.
POSSIBLE FORMS:
ZIGZAGGING, ZIGZAG, ZAGGED, ZAGGING1
In each of Woolf’s fiction from 1919 through 1931 below, the word “zigzag” and
its other possible forms appears at least once. When observing the occurrences of the
individual passages, a certain clarification unfolds that suggests Woolf’s growth as an
author, particularly in her ability to ‘tame’ her mental roaming in order to facilitate a
proper balance of suggestion in her imagery. The following passages are meant to draw
attention to the overarching themes that zigzag their way in and out of her texts. They are
meant to help the reader get into the ‘role’ of a sympathetic companion on this narrative
journey.
PASSAGE 1: Kew Gardens (1919): “The figures of these men and women straggled past
the flower-bed wit a curiously irregular movement not unlike that of the white and blue
butterflies who crossed the turf in zig-zag flights from bed to bed. The man was about six
inches in front of the women, strolling, carelessly, while she bore on with greater

7
purpose, only turning her head now and then to see that the children were not too far
behind. The man kept this distance in front of the woman purposely, though perhaps
unconsciously, for he wished to go on with his thoughts.
Note: In Kew Gardens, “zig-zag” describes a “curiously irregular movement not unlike
that of the white and blue butterflies who crossed the turf in zig-zag flights from bed to
bed.” During this appearance of the word, Woolf introduces the reader to her concern
about distance and proximity: the man was about six inches in front of the women.”
PASSAGE 2: Jacobs Room (1922): Chapter 2: “Now it was clouding over.
Back came the sun, dazzling. […] It fell like an eye upon the stirrups, and then suddenly
and yet very gently rested upon the bed, upon the alarum clock, and upon the butterfly
box stood open. The pale clouded yellows had pelted over the moor; they zigzagged
across the purple clover. The fritillaries flaunted along the hedgerows. The blues settled
on little bones lying on the turf with the sun beating on them, and the painted ladies and
the peacocks feasted upon bloody entrails dropped by a hawk.”
PASSAGE 3: Chapter 5: “At Mudie’s corner in Oxford Street all the red and blue beads
had run together on the string. … The proximity of the omnibuses gave the outside
passengers an opportunity to stare into each other’s faces. Yet few took advantage of it.
Each had his own business to think of. Each had his past shut in him like the leaves of a
book known to him by heart; and his friends could only read the title, James Spalding, or
Charles Budgeon, and the passengers going the opposite way could read nothing at all—
save “a man with a red moustache,” “a young man in grey smoking a pipe.” The October
sunlight rested upon all these men and women sitting immobile; and little Johnnie
Sturgeon took the chance to swing down the staircase, carrying his large mysterious
parcel, and so dodging a zigzag course between the wheels he reached the pavement,
started to whistle a tune and soon was out of sight—for ever. The omnibuses jerked on,
and every single person felt relief at being a little nearer to his journey’s end, though
some cajoled themselves past the immediate engagement by promise of indulgence
beyond … Jacob, getting off his omnibus, loitered up [St. Paul’s Cathedral’s] steps,
consulted his watch, and finally made up his mind to go in. … Does it need an effort?
Yes. These changes of mood wear us out.”
The initial double z in “dazzling” increases the reader’s attention to the word
“zigzagged.” As in the first passage, proximity resurfaces, as well as colors. Again,
“zigzag” is used to describe movement. The repetition of “Butterflies” and alliteration in
“Blue Butterflies” and “butterfly box.”

8

PASSAGE 4: Mrs. Dalloway (1925): (SEPTIMUS) “Where were his papers? the things
he had written? […] She brought him his papers, the things he had written, things she had
written for him. She tumbled them out on to the sofa. They looked at them together.
Diagrams, designs, little men and women brandishing sticks for arms, with wings—
where they?—on their backs; circles traces round shillings and sixpences—the suns and
stars; zigzagging precipices with mountaineers ascending roped together, exactly like
knives and forks; sea pieces with little faces laughing out of what might perhaps be
waves: the map of the world. Burn them! He cried. Now for his writings; how the dead
sing behind rhododendron bushes; odes to Time; conversations with Shakespeare; Evans,
Evans, Evans—his message from the dead; do not cut down trees; tell the Prime Minister.
Universal love: the meaning of the world. Burn them! He cried.”
Note: Here, Septimus’s “change of mood” wears him out too much; this passage precedes
his suicide. “Roped together” is reminiscent of Passage 3’s beads running “together on a
string.” “Sun” repeats, as does the image of fire (“burn”). In this passage, Septimus calls
his papers “odes to Time,” suggesting the reason why Mrs. Dalloway is exclusively used
later in this discussion to describe Woolf’s temperament of time in her novel.
PASSAGE 5: To The Lighthouse (1927): (MRS. RAMSAY) “And she waited a little,
knitting, wondering, and slowly rose those words they had said at dinner, “the China rose
is all abloom and buzzing with the honey bee,” began washing from side to side of her
mind rhythmically, and as they washed, words, like little shaded lights, one red, one blue,
one yellow, lit up in the dark of her mind, and seemed leaving their perches up there to
fly across and across, or to cry out and to be echoed; so she turned a felt on the table
beside her for a book. […] And she opened the book and began reading here and there at
random, and as she did so, she felt that she was climbing backwards, upwards, shoving
her way up under petals that curved over her, so that she only knew this is white, or this
is red. She did not know at first what the words meant at all. … She read and turned the
page, swinging herself, zigzagging this way and that, from one line to another as from
one branch to another, from one red and white flower to another, until a little sound
roused her—her husband slapping his thighs.
But now, it didn’t matter a damn who reached Z (if thought ran like an alphabet
from A to Z). Somebody would reach it—if not he, then another. This man’s strength
and sanity, his feeling for straight forward simple things, these fishermen, the poor old
crazed creature in Muckelbackit’s cottage made him feel so vigorous, so relieved of
something that he felt roused and triumphant and could not choke back his tears.”
Note: Discussed later, this passage in To The Lighthouse is used to describe Woolf’s

9
vision of how one should read. As in previous passages, colors are repeated, as is the
double z in “buzzing” adds greater salience to the word “zigzagging.” Woolf introduces
the concept of echoing, or repeating. Literally, she is echoing parts of her past works.
PASSAGE 6: The Waves (1931): (BERNARD) “I was saying there was a willow tree. Its
shower of falling branches, its creased and crooked bark had the effect of what remains
outside our illusions yet cannot stay them, is changed by them for the moment, yet shows
through stable, still, and with a sternness that our lives lack. Hence the comment it
makes; the standard it supplies, and the reason why, as we flow and change, it seems to
measure. […] Then Jinny came. She flashed her fire over the tree. She was like a
crinkled poppy, febrile, thirsty with the desire to drink dry dust. Darting, angular, not in
the least impulsive, she came prepared. So little flames zigzag over the cracks in the dry
earth. She made the willows dance, but not with illusion; for she saw nothing that was
not there. It was a tree; there was the river; it was afternoon; here we were; I in my serge
suit; she in green. There was no past, no future; merely the moment in its ring of light,
and our bodies; and the inevitable climax, the ecstasy.”
Note: Bernard uses the word “zigzag” during his description of Jinny, augmented by the
echoing—or repeating—use of “she.” As in previous passages, imagery of fire and
colors are repeated. This passage is also suggestive of Woolf’s conception of time as a
series of still “moments.”

LOST IN TRANSLATION
In Woolf’s analyses of reading she alerts readers to the threat of illusive-elusive
narrative landscapes in the misdirecting memory, which can cause “imperfect sympathy”:
“Parts of the book seem to have sunk away, others to be starting out in undue
prominence” (DIII), she writes in her diary. In Jacob’s Room, Woolf posits the idea of
misplaced or mis-mapped emotion as the topography of the psyche and of speech is
scrutinized:

10
…consider the effect of sex – how between man and woman it hangs wavy,
tremulous, so that here’s a valley, there’s a peak, when in truth, perhaps, all’s as
flat as my hand. Even the exact words get the wrong accent on them.
The heaving landscape lying ahead could – with that foregrounded tentative
“perhaps” – be illusory, and suggests that this comment throws into relief the often
primal return to the name of the love-object as a repeated sound rather than signifier,
spoken aloud as though negotiating a tricky route. Woolf is aware of the distinction—the
term “undue” above implying this claim-- between worthy and unworthy narrative
endeavors. In her attentiveness of Sterne’s errant style as an inefficient form of travel,
she enlightens readers that ‘zigzagging’ takes up more space and time than a straight line.
Yet, here divergences of ‘zigzagging’ compose the journey itself. The pleasure of
the journey lies in linguistic indulgences that do not necessarily advance plot or deepen
character, Hazlitt explaining that “The soul of a journey is liberty[…]to think, feel, do,
just as one pleases” (‘On going a Journey’ 181). In Sterne, the veering sentences of
Shandy’s ‘chat’, piling clause upon clause, slow him down, but it is precisely from these
seemingly ‘wasted’ words that his characteristic humor is generated. Woolf herself
cannot resist indulging in percussive effects that relish words for words’ sake, as selfreflexively dramatized in The Voyage Out’s interlude of abandon. Hewet’s freedom of
movement in ‘Sternean’ “fine air”(‘Sterne’ 284) is manifested in Hewet’s freedom of
speech:
He shouted out a line of poetry, but the words escaped him, and he stumbled
among lines and fragments of lines which had no meaning at all except for
the beauty of the words […He] ran swinging from side to side down the hill
[…] roaring innumerable words, lovely words…
(The Voyage Out 174)
Hewet’s zigzagging “from side to side” distributes himself further across time and space
than the straight line, just as poetic immersion in the sonic force of words allows the

11
narrator’s voice to preside over the whole work. Yet within this freedom, the words can
become unintelligible because unmediated words run away with Hewet and Woolf, with
the artist of course indulging as the critic is subdued. If the words have no meaning, yet
are beautiful, “innumerable” and “lovely,” the critic is unable to disagree because he does
not even know what words to disagree with; if there is no word to create a word-symbol,
the critic is left like a scientist without his beakers.
The starling attack in Between the Acts is an exploration of words’ soundscape
much like the audible airplane of Mrs. Dalloway, yet recalling the proliferating ‘z’ of
“zigzagging”:
The whole tree hummed with the whizz they made, as if each bird plucked a
wire. A whizz, a buzz rose from the bird-buzzing, bird-vibrant, birdblackened tree. The tree became a rhapsody, a quivering cacophony, a whizz
and vibrant rapture, branches, leaves, birds syllabling discordantly life, life,
life, without measure...
(Between The Acts 245)
Visually and aurally this passage resonates, as “whole” morphs into “hummed” and
‘optically alliterates’ with “whiz”, the ‘w’ sound rounding off the sentence in “wire”.
The double-‘z’ runs rampant in the repetition of “whizz” and “buzz/buzzing”; the ‘y’
suffix also permeates the layering of “rhapsody”, “cacophony” and “discordantly”. The
triple repetition of the “bird” prefix with the reverberating ‘b’ sound is echoed and
intensified in the relentless “life, life, life”. Woolf attempts to replicate the
“rhapsody…quivering cacophony” of discordant “syllabling” in a highly self-reflexive
display of the suddenness and uncontainability of inspiration. She enacts a kind of
oral/aural drag, offering indeterminate sounds that the ear clutches at as one passes
quickly through time and space in the carriage or car.

12
The jolting of the carriage that jerks forwards and backwards and side to side is
Sterne’s mode of transport for the inefficient narrative that lurches along and threatens to
be stymieing itself. The curve and counter-curve of corporal Trim’s flourish (550) is
verbally articulated: “What is the life of man! Is it not to shift from side to side? – from
sorrow to sorrow? – to button up one cause of vexation!- and unbutton another!” (302).
The syntactical balancing facilitated by “and”, “from” and “to” mimetically demonstrates
Sterne’s hobby-horse metaphor: “off I set – up one lane – down another, through this
turn-pike, over that” (268). This kind of doing and undoing, voyaging out and circling
back is envisaged by Woolf as a process for the reader as much as for the writer. In To
the Lighthouse Mrs. Ramsay,
opened the book and began reading here and there at random, and as she did
so she felt that she was climbing backwards, upwards…she read and turned
the page, swinging herself, zigzagging this way and that, from one line to
another…
(100-1)
Woolf offers efficient encouragement for her readers to read this way, even if it halts the
progress of the syntactical and narratological journey by teasingly directing the reader
backwards through her books; in Sternian words, “instead of advancing, as a common
writer, in my work…I am just thrown so many volumes back” (257). Both Sterne’s and
Woolf’s leaps in time and place via interjectory interludes necessitate return, as though
there are multiple points of narrative embarkation and arrival. There are also many ways
of being waylaid, even at a syntactical level, by the stray wanderings of an apparently
well-destined sentence:
Dr. Slop drew up his mouth, and was just beginning to return my uncle Toby
the compliment of his Whu-u-u- or interjectional whistle,- when the door
hastily opening in the next chapter but one – put an end to the affair. (163)

13
Here the phrasing uneasily pivots, or zigzags, between tenses, advancing and retarding
the sentence. Slop in the imperfect tense “was just beginning to return” much as this
passage is in its foreshadowed interruption. The sentence itself is used as a waylay, or
interruption, to the journey. The hyphenated “Whu-u-u” of the “interjectional whistle” is
itself disrupted by the dashes around the phrase “when the door hastily opening in the
next chapter but one –,” the punctuation misleading us into reading it as a subordinate
clause, when in fact the destination-phrase “put an end to the affair” follows directly from
the door opening rather than the “interjectional whistle”. A mini-history is deposited in
every clause, as we pass through the sentence but find that we necessarily re-read it in
order to reach some meaning. Sterne’s contemporary print convention of the ‘catchword’
at the bottom of the page meta-textually enacts Mrs. Ramsay’s Shandean impulse to
rapidly read ahead, as the reader anticipates what is to come but is then forced to read the
same word again overleaf. Yet, reading ahead wont help the reader anticipate what is to
come unless he or she is looking in the right place. The movement from one page to the
next is thus both propulsive and regressive, as we flick backwards and forwards, side to
side, to locate ourselves again in the sentence and in narrative.

Much like Sterne, Woolf leaps to explore the terrain of thought and how it is
mapped in modulated speech. Woolf works with the different voices of her re-created
spaces in two seemingly antagonistic ways, both to unify and to fragment time and space.
Just as Clarissa’s personal voice must contend with the loud presence of the city, so must
the woman writer both accept and deny the urge to impose a unifying vision.
Incorporated into the voices of the novel, especially through the use of water imagery,

14
these preoccupations form the basis of Woolf’s often thought of “feministic re-visioning”
of urban and human experience. The act of writing what demands to be read aloud is an
attempt to trace precarious mental states as Sterne’s Yorick’s:
…now, if I have strength and Spirits to trail my pen down to the bottom of the
page… upon taking up my pen, my poor pulse quickend…and tears stood ready
in my Eyes to fall upon the paper, as I traced the word Eliza. O Eliza! Eliza!
(Tristram Shandy 112-4)
“The word Eliza” is transferred from the mind to the paper to the mouth in the climactic
lament: the exclamation marks force the name to leap out of the page, demanding that it
be spoken aloud. “Eliza” is the fixed point the sentence gropes for. In Between the Acts,
Woolf similarly articulates this vivifying of language that seems to transform itself into
the written to be spoken: “Words this afternoon ceased to lie flat in the sentence. They
rose, became menacing and shook their fists at you” (74). In the earlier work, Pointz
Hall, language threateningly assumes a life of its own for William Dodge too: “words
erect themselves and point fingers at him”(89). In Between the Acts’ literally (physically)
performed words, language has its own topography of rising and falling cadences. In one
instance, Phyllis raises her voice before trailing off:
Gentles and simples, I address you all (she piped)
Our act is done, our scene is over […]
But soon will rise another dawning […]
You shall see….
Her voice petered out. (Between the Acts 114)
The one-dimensional four-dot ellipsis offers only a trace of where the words have been.
This diminution is paralleled by the peaks and troughs of the musical accompaniment:
“The music petered out on the last word we” (118). The faltering tape-recorder
fragments the text, so that the reader’s eye travels over rough terrain in truncated
heightened words, flat ellipses and mis-placed dashes: “The gramophone gurgled Unity –

15
Dispersity. It gurgled Un..dis…And ceased” (Between The Acts, 118), much like the
individual letters of the advertising plane in Mrs. Dalloway (20). “The dots are a
characteristic device,” Woolf states in her essay ‘The Sentimental Traveller,’ they are,
part of an artistic system that prevails throughout. If only, in travelling, you will
open your mind to receive all impressions and force your imagination to track
down the most fugitive of suggestions, something charming and valuable, because
original, will be recorded. This is perhaps the course any sensitive mind adopts
naturally, though it does not always go on to trace it out upon paper. (44)
In turn, the act of writing what longs to be read aloud becomes the tracing of
precarious mental states. As with Sterne’s Yorwick (above), Woolf’s Septimus in Mrs.
Dalloway similarly escalates this ‘precarious mental state.’ Being shell-shocked from
World War I, Septimus is unlike the other characters in the novel. However, readers do
not need to be told that Septimus has been driven “mad” during the war, for his insanity
is suggested by his different pattern speech and mental thought; when his consciousness
is first introduced, the narrative comes to a dead stop: “Men must not cut down trees.”
“There is a God.” “Change the world.” (24). The diminutive sentences force the
narrative to switch not only to a different narrative voice, but also to a different form of
structure. Unexplained, the short, cutting sentences vary significantly from the lyrical
prose that dominates most of the text; primarily, Mrs. Dalloway flows very tightly
together, riddled with semi-colons and commas to keep Woolf’s characters tightly knit.
This use of punctuation allows Woolf to show multiple people, places or ideas as
companions in the narrative. Breaking away from her “great discovery” in narrative (her
“tunneling” technique) Woolf implies that Septimus’ consciousness is different from the
other characters’ in the novel, and perhaps, is unable to be sympathetically
communicated. Septimus’ thoughts and speech are rarely articulated for longer than a

16
few passages at a time, allowing Woolf to aesthetically distance herself from Septimus
through, ironically, the act of not writing. Woolf not only finds it difficult to write about
Septimus, but also doubts her readerships’ ability to sympathize with an insane character.
Furthermore, instead of lyrical passages moving in and out of consciousnesses, Septimus
is sometimes only read through curt explanations of movement,
… he could hardly walk. He lay on the sofa and made her hold his hand to
prevent him from falling down, down, he cried, into the flames! and saw faces
laughing at him, calling him horrible disgusting names, from the walls, and hands
pointing round the screen. Yet they were quite alone. But he began to talk aloud,
answering people, arguing, laughing, crying, getting very excited and making her
write things down. Perfect nonsense it was; about death; about Miss Isabel Pole.
(66-67)
“Yet they were quite alone” is one of the few instances in the novel when the narrator
intrudes the text-- perhaps, in fact, to make sure the reader hasn’t lost their place within
the narrative. What remains important, however, is that Septimus’ words are transferred
from his mind to his mouth to his wife’s writing hand in the climactic lament “flames!”
The exclamation mark forces the word to leap from the readers’ page and demand it to be
yelled—that it be “cried”—to necessitate attention. His eventual demise is the same
fixed point that the Sterne passage above had “groped” for. Yet Septimus “Make it
known” (24), one must “write it down.” Spoken language does not hold the same power
as that which is written. Distinct and pungent by the very punctuation it uses, he wrote it
down (25), set astray by parentheses, appears almost as a natural act of movement,
especially by its placement within the passage; it follows the first instance of a rarelyused series of short sentences, which open the paragraph. In turn, Septimus’ shortsentence repetition becomes just as important as their exclusivity within the narrative
frame.

17

BEWARE: FAULTY WORDS AHEAD
Woolf’s essay ‘Craftsmanship’ informs readers that words are an impure medium.
In the later-published Orlando, when Woolf’s main character is mesmerized by a
Russian princess, he anxiously searches for, and is eventually unable, to find for the
right words to describe her:
[What was she like?] Snow, cream, marble, cherries, alabaster, golden wire? None
of these. She was like a fox, or an olive tree; like the waves of the sea when you
look down upon them from a height; like an emerald; like the sun on a green hill
which is yet clouded—like nothing he had seen or known in England. Ransack the
language as he might, words failed him. He wanted another landscape and another
tongue. (Oralndo 45)
Even when Orlando’s feelings are most passionate, they are expressed in terms of
artificiality, for example, when Orlando tries to actually define his lover Sasha:
Images, metaphors of the most extreme and extravagant twined and twisted in his
mind. He called her a melon, a pineapple, an olive tree, an emerald and a fox in
the snow all in the space of three seconds; he did not know whether he had heard
her, tasted her, seen her or all three together.
(36)
Seemingly, Orlando appears destined to only find uncongenial, that is, improper ‘word’
equivalents for Sasha. Even when Orlando tries to write poetry, a medium that would
presumably allow for mis-definition, words still remain inadequate:
He was describing, as all young poets are for ever describing, nature, and in order
to match the shade of green precisely, he looked . . . at the thing itself, which
happened to be a laurel bush growing beneath the window. After that, of course,
he could write no more. Green in nature is one thing, green in literature another.
Nature and letters seem to have a natural antipathy: bring them together and they
tear each other to pieces (Orlando 18).
Find no adequacy in words, Orlando instead is attracted is to the abstraction of images
and metaphors, suggested by the biography’s shift towards symbolic representation. In
turn, Woolf’s actual “symbols,” such as the kingfisher, prove to be just as suggestive and
expressive as a “shadow” shape. For Woolf, “thought could be conveyed by shape more

18
effectively than by words” (‘The Cinema’ 270). The shape of her text, the zigzag
composition and the mode it unfolds in, is just as emphatic as the movements of her
characters. As critic J. Hillis Miller notes, “The most important themes of a given novel
are likely to lie not in anything which is explicitly affirmed, but in significances
generated by the way in which the story is told” (54). Woolf’s organization in her novels
is not arbitrary; rather, each is organized around various forms of occurrence through
which she “zigzags.”
Both Sterne and Woolf are preoccupied with the boundaries of the text as
representative of the boundaries that separate author and reader. The inside/outside-text
motif is visually encrypted in Tristram Shandy by the juxtaposition of the “monumental
inscription” “Alas, poor Yorick!”(30) enclosed in a box, and the unbounded text
representing the speech of a passer-by: one is written, the other read. Sterne ventures
outside the text and then invites the ‘real’ world into it, hence Woolf’s comment on
Shandy: “everything was inside the book, nothing outside”(427-8). Sterne and Woolf
enjoy zigzagging over formal and psychological borders, in their quest to move the
reader: the editor’s incursive comments in Shandy and Woolf’s digressive endnotes are
often extra-narrative additions that transgress textual boundaries. In the 1765 Saunders
edition of Shandy the outside is literally inserted into the text, in an advertisement for the
publisher’s other printed works between Volumes VIII and IX. Sterne’s self-reflexive
real-time reference to Shandy’s writing on “March 9, 1759”(42) – is echoed in Woolf’s
most Shandean work, Orlando, which ends on 11th October 1928, the book’s publication
date. The ‘real’ world outside is sallied into and finds accommodation in the text.

19
As when we hear the echoes of Yorick’s cry in Hewitt’s nonsensical verbal and
literal roaming that ends on the see-sawing iambic and trochaic disyllables: “about
Rachel, about Rachel,” Woolf’s characters, too, reciprocate with their repetitions:
““Terence […]Terence – that’s like the cry of an owl,”” (207) in The Voyage Out, “Lord,
Lord” or “But Clarissa… Clarissa” in Mrs. Dalloway, “I, I, I” (144) in The Waves, etc.
The list could go on, for it is a repeating motif in Woolf’s work.
Ironically, Orlando is one of the only novels that does not mention the
word/phrase ‘zigzagging,’ and yet does, in every sense, gather the various aspects of
Woolf’s approach to fiction. The intensity of Orlando’s life and feelings is evoked by the
wealth of genres and art forms the text borrows from. Orlando is a composite work
drawing from the theater, the masque, even from architecture if we consider that it can be
read as Woolf’s attempts to deconstruct “mausoleum-shaped Victorian biographies.” It is
perhaps precisely because Orlando is a mixture-- a hybrid—that it can weave through a
great number of intertexts, each with its own connotations. As a mock-biography, it
rejects category, Floriane Reviron-Piegay noting,
It has always been difficult to classify [Orlando], and critics have applied
different definitions to it. According to Nancy Topping Bazin, it is a “fantasybiography” (139); for Rachel Blau du Plessis “Orlando is at least a parodic
biography, a female history of Britain, a feminist apologue . . . an insouciant
break with conventional norms surrounding gender, sexual identity, and
narrative” (131); and Joanne Trautmann gives a definition which perhaps shows
the impossibility of precisely defining Orlando: “Among other categories, it may
be seen as a parody of biography, an essay in the exotic, a mock-heroic novel of
ideas, an imaginative literary and social history of England and a biography of
Vita Sackville-West” (40).
By debunking the typical category of ‘novel,’ early bookstores wondered what section to
place Orlando, in the novel section or biography section. Most noticably, it manipulates

20
time, starting in the sixteenth century and ending in the twentieth. The main character is
male for the first half, female for the second half, which allows for Woolf’s sudden shifts
in plot and abrupt changes of scenery, from England to Broussa and the Thessalian Hills
via Constantinople and then back to England; “Orlando is the literary transposition of
what Woolf sensed the cinema could achieve if it stopped being merely a recording
device and became a vehicle of fantasy: ‘the past could be unrolled, distances annihilated,
and the gulfs which dislocate novels . . . could by the sameness of the background, by the
repetition of some scene, be smoothed away’ (“Cinema” 272).” (Reviron-Piégay 40).
“One might say that in Mrs. Woolf’s novels,” a critic notes,
life has turned into what she once described it as being—‘a luminous halo, a
semi-transparent envelope surrounding us from the beginning of consciousness to
the end. […] And the novel has turned into something very like a poem. This
incisive and unflagging prose is as rapid as verse, and the utterances follow one
another with a short of rhythmical incantation. Sometimes they are frankly
antiphons, and one always has that sense of a response; the book moves to that
measure. This formal effect recurs with the further settings which have given its
title; prefixed to each movement of it there is a background of the sea, with
changes from dawn to sunset. (‘Review of the Waves’ 20)
Character, mood and self are shown by an individual gesture, an image, a perception, yet
they are filaments, especially in The Waves, in the consciousness of each speaker: “Each
of them is much more conscious than we habitually are—this sharpened and dramatized
consciousness is the ‘convention of the novel’—and utters not merely his sense of the
moment but again and again, his secret individuality” (‘Review of the Waves’ 20).
The linguistic ‘returns’ displayed suggest how Mrs. Dalloway is composed: “The
part of us which appears, are so momentarily compare with the other, the unseen part of
us, which spreads wide, the unseen might survive, be recovered somehow attached to this
person or that, or even haunting certain places after death perhaps-perhaps” (79), Clarissa

21
states. Woolf’s repetitive tentative “perhaps” creates the impression of an author full of
suggestions and no definite answers. Seen character runs of the risk of being illusory,
suggesting that there is a discrepancy between the seen and unseen aspects of an
individual.
Woolf’s assumption about the way one mind can be related to others is a
generative principle lying behind the form of her novel, for the question of narrative
voice can be seen as a special case of the problem of relations between minds. The
narrator is a mind projected by its way of “speaking,” “with special access to [the
characters’] minds and with special powers for expression on what goes on there” (Miller
52). Therefore the manipulation of narrative voice is closely associated with the theme of
human time /history that seems intrinsic to the form of her novel. While the past tense in
a novel typically establishes the narrator as something living after the events of the story,
readers likewise assume that this narrator is retelling the past perfectly. As Miller
suggests,
The narrator tells the story in a present which moves forward toward the future by
way of a recapitulation or repetition of the past. This retelling brings that past up
to the present as a completed whole, or it moves towards such completion. This
form of an incomplete circle, time moving toward a closure which will bring
together past, present, and future as a perfected whole, is the temporal form of
many novels. (52)
Woolf investigates these traditional conventions of form in order to bring
something new into fiction. Woolf’s assumption about time is that it is a series of still
moments, in which a succession of singular moments take place and then are later
collected in a memory. In Mrs. Dalloway, the novel depends on the presence of a
narrator who remembers all and who has the power of bringing the past into the present:
“In Mrs. Dalloway, narration is repetition,” Miller concludes. In turn, the narrative’s

22
language generates a certain texture to the novel, specific to place and character while
repetition is used to create fixed specificity. Although unaware, the characters depend on
the narrator, who is the preserver and writer of their thoughts, sensations, images and
speech: “She rescues them from time past and presents them again in language to the
reader. Likewise, the narrator’s mind is dependent on the characters’ minds, for
evidentially, it could not have a voice without them.

“WHAT’S SAID HERE, STAYS HERE”:
USING THE PAST TENSE FOR THE PRESENT
Woolf’s use of time is a form of indirect discourse, in which she zigzags through
temporal regulation: the narrator reports in the past tense thoughts which once occurred
in past moments of characters’ lives. This narrative style punctuates the narrative and
reveals the presence of one-way relationship, readers often taking the ventriloquist’s
voice for granted. We hear Peter Walsh’s thinking: “Clarissa refused me, he thought”; “It
is Clarissa herself, he thought.” In turn, if the reader questions where he is placed at any
given page of Mrs. Dalloway, the ‘place’ is often within an individual mind that is being
understood from inside by an omnipresent, all-knowing mind, speaking from some later
point in time, a point that is always “after” anything the characters even think or feel.
Speaking for all of them, knowing all of them, the narrator is everything and everywhere
at once.
Woolf’s use of past tense is conventional to her fiction. While the first sentence,
“Mrs. Dalloway said she would buy the flowers herself,” establishes a temporal distance
between the narrator’s present and the present of Clarissa, everything the characters do or
think is placed firmly in an indefinite past as something which has always already

23
happened when the reader finally stumbles upon it. In turn, Mrs. Dalloway has, what
Miller coins, “double temporal form” (59). Within the characters’ “general pastness of
the narration,” they “remember something from their own pasts.” Then, when “the
narrator reports” the event in the initial “indirect discourse,” Woolf does not have the to
place it in the past than to cast it as
… some version of the past tense which she has already been using for the
‘present’ of the characters’ experience: ‘How fresh, how calm, stiller than this of
course, the air was in the early morning.’ That ‘was’ is a past within a past, a
double repetition.
The sentence before this one includes the ‘had’ of the past perfect which
places it in a past behind that past which is the ‘present’ of the novel,” (59-60)
Which is, of course, the day of Clarissa’s party.
The “now” of the sentence describing Clarissa’s “plunge” (3) onto the streets of
London is the narrator’s memory of Clarissa’s memory of her childhood home, which is
brought back to her mind so vividly that is becomes the present within the reader’s actual
experience of reading. The sentence literally opens the door “with a little squeak of
hinges which she could hear now” (3) to a flood of memories that bring a long-gone
memory back as a ‘present’ with the complexity and fullness of immediate experience.
The way readers locate themselves in the memories is by gravitating between both Peter
Walsh’s and Clarissa’s accounts of Burton to collect and use daily conventions such as
dinner as time-markers. Still, the temporal location of the memories, for the most part,
remains ambiguous.
Woolf aims at expressing the “moment of being” as a subjective conception of
time, the narrator or biographer in Orlando awkwardly trying to reconcile “the rapid
passage of events and actions” and the “slow opening up of single and solemn moments
of concentrated emotion” (‘De Quincey’s’ 139). The characters in Mrs. Dalloway

24
concentrate their moments of emotion in the past, while Big Ben ceaselessly moves their
‘present’ time forward. Mentally, the characters cyclically return to memories as the
clock repeats his strikes.
The temporal placement of Clarissa’s experiences outside of London is in the
form of a memory of the past in Bourton. The memories intrude as waylays on the
narrative journey; however, while they do not progress the narrative, they do provide
insights that are important for character development. Generally, the main characters are
restored to life in memory by bits and pieces. To compose a character requires readers to
collect, and essentially draft, a mold through repeated actions, thoughts or memories.
When collected, the memories form a central episode from their common past, specific in
both time and place. The characters then come together at Clarissa’s party again in a
casual repetition of the past. However, things have, of course, changed. Woolf uses both
these temporal time frames in her narrator’s perspective of a single distance from the text.
The narrator moves forward through its own time of narration toward the point when
Peter and Clarissa come together in the completion of the final sentences of the novel.
Yet even this is fragmented, for they “almost come together,” since a temporal gap still
exists in the separation between “is” and “was”: Peter Walsh states,
It is Clarissa.
For there she was. (296)
This moment of almost-completion passes quickly in the lives of the characters. The
party ends, the novel ends and readers are left wondering what is to become of them all.

25
Mrs. Dalloway, as story that is a recollection composed of recollections, provides a
perfect example of Woolf’s exploration of the functioning of memory as a form of
repetition. It also questions both chronological and psychological duration (the time, so
to speak, it takes a reader to read the text versus the time that the reader feels or accepts
has passed). Woolf likewise has a heightened awareness of the time physical events take
and the space the narrative allows for scenery to be developed. Although time can be
analyzed in each work by Woolf, reading it through Mrs. Dalloway as a lens provides a
solid example of her process in regards to time’s limitations and demands. In Mrs.
Dalloway, Big Ben introduces the concept of time and its authority, for he surpasses
being merely a sound that chimes for characters and readers: he becomes a visual persona
within our very imagination.
In Mrs. Dalloway, moments develop through the scope of mystery, yet they do not
conclude in the fashion of a nineteenth-century novel. In Woolf’s narratives, the
constraint of time allows for narrative variation and movement. The spacing and
movement of the incidents that bestow development on her novel unfold slowly as a
process of recognition, the narrator manipulating time through intricate organization.
Furthermore, the nature of Woolf mental state, as displayed in her diaries, cyclically
declined and recovered multiple times, perhaps suggesting her reasoning for representing
time and reality as fractured. When translated into novel form, the fractured pieces fight
to configure a whole, which resists the ‘clock-time’ it takes for a return from insanity; the
‘clock-time’ transfigures the creation of the different time, or the ‘mental-time,’ when
one’s mental state is altered.

26
Like the months in The Years and the hours in Mrs. Dalloway, time passes arbitrarily
whether the characters like it or not: “The years, we know, are indifferent to us; we grow
old whether we are ambitious or lazy, married or single, good or bad. … Mrs. Woolf
ignores what the years ignore, and this might seem right if the years did not ignore
everything; they have no story” (Muir 622). Although the characters have no control
over it, they are aware and in turn subject to its decorum. In Orlando, time passing with
Orlando living during almost four centuries and barely aging, is perhaps the most
subversive aspect of the novel.
Woolf’s zigzagging is a dramatizing of time’s very implications. Time is
questionable because of the way it is represented in the novels: Orlando ends on the date
of publication, The Years stirs the sensation of passing time, and Mrs. Dalloway is
confined to a single day. Her concern with specificity of time suggests the importance it
has in her novels. When Woolf writes of Sterne that “A Sentimental Journey is a
succession of portraits” (404), proving she is more self-commentary than she is in A
Sketch of the Past. Much like the movement through tableaux of characters in The
Waves, the vast, past memories that compose each individual’s making and thinking span
the course of decades. Time and place function as tools of awareness so that Woolf is
able to “tunnel” out her characters’ emotions and consciousnesses, unfolding them pieceby-piece; together they provide the perfect type of boundaries for Woolf’s zigzagging.
For example, the beginning of Mrs. Dalloway, when Clarissa is found shopping,
Woolf begins in an interior world and transforms it into something readers recognize as
the localized “morning” time. The blending of objective and subjective time is initially
given to us before we acknowledge that the novel is confined to a single day; readers are

27
then jerked from Clarissa’s “now” immediately into Clarissa’s past, when she was
eighteen, and then, once again, we return to Clarissa’s present instant at the curb. The
tenses, shifts, and innovative breakthrough that took “year’s groping to discover what I
call my tunneling process, by which I tell the past by installments, as I have needed of it”
is communicated. Her “prince discovery so far” is zigzagging.
It should be noted that traveling forwards and backwards in time, zigzagging in and
out of various characters’ minds and tenses creates a movement suggestive of what we
think madness would be like. The mind can no longer represent the world in a coherent
form: it becomes a montage, ‘a-bric-a-brac’ reality. The narrative focus continually shifts
from the external world to the minds of the characters perceiving it. Woolf’s ramblings
go in and out of her novels and formal essays, that she often uses a “But to return to...”
(EIV 319) phrase to resituate the disoriented reader.
Woolf’s very approach to space and time in Mrs. Dalloway spirals in various
directions—the third-person narrator suggesting the author’s vast control and the clocks
dictating the time. The familiar, classical unities of time and place mark off events as the
hours and half-hours are struck off on London clocks. Furthermore, Big Ben, striking
with “extraordinary vigor, as if a young man, strong, indifferent, inconsiderate” is both a
character and a device. It quickly establishes itself on the first page: “There! Out it
boomed. First a warning, musical; then the hour, irrevocable. Leaden circles dissolve in
the air.” As readers, we are then carried through a single day, beginning in the morning:
“what a lark!” It is a simple time-line: a woman’s day. Big Ben establishes time, while
London establishes place. Within these two limiting forces, Woolf can shuffle in
memories without the fear of stalling the narrative progression.

28

Character as Narrative
Narrative as Character
Like trail signs designating family portrait worthy scenery, readers depend on Mrs.
Dalloway’s Big Ben to suggest moments of significance. As a character, his offered
service is reliability: when Elizabeth Dalloway leaves Westminster and is out of the
‘hearing-zone’ of Big Ben, she frantically wonders “what was the time?—where was the
clock?” (137). Big Ben also upholds authority, giving the text a specific time frame,
often intruding into the thoughts of the characters. The other authoritative character—Dr.
Bradshaw—likewise interrupts Clarissa’s party with the news of Septimus’ death. It is no
coincidence that his surname is synonymous with timekeeping: “in the early twentieth
century, a ‘Bradshaw’ was a railway timetable” (Whitworth 120)—Dr. Bradshaw’s wish
to confine Septimus to a home is synonymous with Big Ben’s confining the characters
within a single day.
Woolf’s narratives appear as a part of “a series of experiments with the emergent
techniques of perspectival narration, temporal discontinuity, and rhythmic jutaposition of
elements” (Fleishman 107). Because Woolf was presumably not writing a novel about
herself, one can argue that time in Mrs. Dalloway is a series of “life junctures”
(Fleishman 108) that depends on the “systems of measurement, the state of motion of the
characters involved, and the degree of simultaneity or divergence in the recording of
various events.” Time must be fractured because the past cannot be distanced by distance,
for even on a journey, the mind can never erase what has come before no matter what

29
location it has happened in. In Mrs. Dalloway, Woolf includes flashbacks of the past, in
which Peter and Clarissa gravitate between the Bourton the of past and the London of the
present. Likewise, Septimus and Rezia gravitate between the war of the past and the
London of the present. Within both sets of characters and memories, time is manipulated
to move forwards and backwards in a cyclical pattern that necessitates both departure and
return. Woolf’s novel is unable to move towards a feasible end-point, and thus relies on
mystery to carry readers from place to place.
As in Jacobs Room and To the Lighthouse, the specificity of time and place
captures the quality of life in an English class system. Lunch, tea, dinner, impose order
on a chaotic modern world just as Mrs. Dalloway’s Big Ben imposes his chimes upon the
characters’ activity. Daily regiments are yet another ‘ordering envelope’ hemorrhaging
into the novel to keep the characters in check. Thus, the London Woolf evokes is
simultaneously solidly traditional and lyrically nostalgic. Amidst the upheaval and
change Woolf depicts in the novel, the monarchy remains intact and the Empire
victorious. The geographical wandering and tropes of travel that are intricately placed
inside its English domestic setting may frustrate and probematizes a purely aesthetic
reading of the novel, but more importantly, it acts as a restraint. Clarissa, “with her
perfect manners, like a real hostess,” with “her courage; her social instinct; he admired
her power of carrying things through” (62), understands her ‘role’ because of these
conventions. A slave to social conventions and time, Clarissa can only roam freely in her
mind.
Big Ben also allows Woolf to play with chronological yet, allowing for repetition.
Characters, in a sense, can do things at the same time because of Big Ben’s loud strikes;

30
because of the clock, readers do not get lost in the no-man’s land when switching in
character or scene. Alongside the “clock-time” plot Big Ben entrenches in the narrative,
non-chronological narrative roams almost ceaselessly on the pages and in the memories
of the characters, but remains strictly bounded by the Big Ben envelope: when Septimus
throws himself from his window, or when Clarissa feels overwhelmed by her past as a
faraway experience and sense of being, Big Ben’s chimes call to readers’ attention not
only the meaningfulness of the episode, but also the meaningfulness of the questions that
compose our natural curiosity: questions of life and death.
Primarily, Big Ben acts as a unifier and placeholder; time, in addition to place,
keeps readers aware of the position or physical reality of the characters. Often there is a
heightened awareness of life when time stands still, and the past and present merge as the
future emerges. In turn, readers are reminded of the ‘exactness’ of moments when all is
at rest; there is a heightened awareness of life when the traveler stops to take a
photograph of his scenery—if beautiful or interesting enough, the traveler suddenly loses
sight of everything else except for the moment.
While Woolf was writing Mrs. Dalloway, her (f)actual ring back to reality was
often “Dinner!”, a recurring interruption of, and conclusion to, various diary entries. For
the characters in Mrs. Dalloway, it is Big Ben—the monumental Westminster clock.
Each time Big Ben strikes, the characters that hear him are lifted out of their transfixed
absorption into the existence of daily strife. Time itself imposes emphasis, reminding
readers and characters alike that each individual life is a part of an all-encompassing
stream, and that with each passing moment, our living, physical life is zigzagging away
from us; there can be no doubt about Woolf’s preoccupation with the problems of time

31
passing and the approach of death. The clocks remind the characters that that they are
getting older, and that their memories act as failed escape routes.
Perpetual return is synonymous with repeating moments. When different
consciousnesses intrude the narrative, time is often rewound and played again. Big Ben
allows for the characters to appreciate “moments” of time as still moments; the sights of
London’s texture, traffic, and single people transfix momentum. Big Ben’s chiming
necessitates the return of the wandering reader back to the single day of Clarissa’s party,
to a present “now.” As Conrad Aiken notes, Woolf “preferred to see [things] through a
safe thickness of plate-glass. It was as if she could not be quite at ease with life until she
had stilled it, reduced it to the mobile immobility of art—reduced it, even, to such
comfortable proportions and orderliness as would not disturb the drawing room. In
Jacobs Room, however, and Mrs. Dalloway Mrs. Woolf began to make it clear that this
tendency to sterile dexterity, though pronounced, might not be fatal” (Aiken 16).
However, Big Ben is somewhat deceptive, for although he upholds authority, his
‘clock-time’ is falsified because it is an arbitrary measure. Woolf shows doubt in his
reality, suggesting a distinct fraction of unity when the St. Margaret’s chiming happens
after Big Ben’s (42). Big Ben seems to be upholding authority, yet paradoxically falsifies
the real nature of time for readers and characters alike, for his way of marking time
stands in contrast to the characters’ experiences of time, particularly in relation to
memory. Movement in mental time, from present to past to present again, is important
for Woolf and her characters, for it requires certain space(s) to define identity and
relationships between characters: when Elizabeth Dalloway leaves Westminster and Big
Ben is no longer present, she notes while walking, that not a single “Dalloway” had ever

32
walked the “Strand” (140). Yet, Elizabeth is only allowed to make these types of
observations when Big Ben is not present. Zigzagging between the past and the present
defines what has happened in the past, drafts the history that composes each character
and illuminates the reasoning behind why a character feels or does. Likewise, it allows
for images and ideas to be imagined, such as Clarissa’s life and the world surrounding
her, while likewise illuminating the very co-existence of someone else’s existence.

MEETING THE QUIRKY BUSBOY:
(THE DAYS WHEN WOOLF HAD FORMAL CHARACTER)
While the 1920s were a time when critics could “unashamedly” (Beja 4) speak of
character in fiction, take E.M. Forster’s Aspects of the Novel or Jane Austen’s work as
examples, Woolf’s characters are compositionally different. As readers, if we accept
E.M. Forester’s remark that Woolf “Could seldom so portray a character that it was
remembered afterwards on its own account as Emma is remembered, for instance, or
Dorothea Casaubon, or Sophia and Constance in The Old Wives’ Tale” (12), her work
potentially may appear to be flawed in its failure to provide a “gallery of memorable
portraits, such as can be derived from the works of other great novelists” (Bennet 20).
However that may be, it is certain that she developed a different method of
characterization from that of other eighteenth and nineteenth century novelists, which
was also capable of producing different effects. Only in her first two novels does Woolf
allow her literary past to constrain her dealings with characters: for example, Mr.
Hilbery2 in Night and Day is introduced traditionally, similarly to how characters are
composed for the reader at first appearance in other nineteenth century works:

33
He was an elderly man, with a pair of oval, hazel eyes which were rather bright
for his time of life, and relieved the heaviness of his face. He played constantly
with a little green stone attached to his watch chain, thus displaying very sensitive
fingers, and had a habit of moving his head hither and thither very quickly
without altering the position of his large and rather corpulent body, so that he
seemed to be providing himself incessantly with food for amusement and
reflection with the least possible expenditure of energy. One might suppose that
he had passed the time of life when his ambitions were personal, or that he had
gratified them as far as he was likely to do, and now employed his considerable
acuteness rather to observe and reflect than to attain any result.
“The fault here is a slight overloading with detail,” critic Joan Bennett reflects, “and the
physical traits are made to carry an undue burden of psychological significance, a
common fault with this type of presentation” (20). While the necessary characteristics of
a traditional portrait are present, such as the traditional explanation to Mr. Hilbery’s,
character, Mr. Hilbery is nonetheless an individual, not a mere prototype. Woolf’s
descriptive language evokes “easily remembered” characteristics that can be developed in
the readers’ mind, and then confirmed late by his behavior. This method of creating a
character offers readers a fictional self-gratulatory feeling of having understanding his
‘self’ from first descriptive appearance; in a sense, it creates imperfect sympathy.
However, this feeling is not provided in later Woolf novels: Peter Walsh’s playing with
his knife in Mrs. Dalloway does not necessarily display “sensitive fingers”; instead, it
displays whatever readers choose the act to display: a nervous tick, an obsession,
possibly. The point here is that if Peter Walsh’s ‘self’ is even comprehended by readers,
it is via his actions and the impressions readers gather from them. One is not told, so to
speak; one is shown. Whether readers acknowledge it as an important attribute of his
personality is entirely personal. In creating this distance of ambiguity, Woolf allows for
readers to wander just as she is.

34
Character in fiction, like personality in real life, is a question of repetition: one
“knows” someone is something because he does certain things in a characteristic way.
Characters and individuals are composed of their own histories of action and the
impressions it leaves. Typically, fictive characters appear to be factitious and coherent
when they repeat certain actions; Peter Walsh is still ‘Peter Walsh’ when he is shown
flicking his knife in both the past and present, but when Sally Seton appears at Clarissa’s
party as “Lady Rosseter,” Sally’s past is almost erased, for self identifies with her new
name as a married woman: “Was it Peter Walsh grown grey? Lady Rosseter asked herself
(who had been Sally Seton)” (181). Indeed, Sally’s new life is not that of a “ragamuffin,”
as were her days in Burton. Yet, in Clarissa’s view, Sally/Lady Rosseter is still
“reckless” (182). While on the one hand characters Woolf must contend with repeating
aspects “being” in order to create identification, she is forced to find other methods that
undermine the fixedness of traditional character within fiction.
The differences between the character of Mr. Hilbery and those in later Woolf
novels become apparent over time, most notably when she discovers her “tunneling”
technique during the composition of Mrs. Dalloway:
I should say a god deal about The Hours3, & my discovery; how I dig out
beautiful caves behind my characters; I think that gives exactly what I want;
humanity, humor, depth. The idea is that the caves shall connect, & each comes
to day light at the present moment… (DII 263)
Mr. Hilbery is not set in motion, nor is he introduced through her ‘unfolding’ process in
which character is given to the reader gradually as one moves through the text. Aside
from Mr. Hilbery, Woolf’s characters’ private contemplations and mental musings take
place while they are in motion: perambulating across Regent’s Park, rushing down Bond
Street, riding on an omnibus across London. Winds, sirens and endless sounds of

35
nautical metaphors are sprinkled into the text, embedded like the candles in a funfettie
cake, endlessly confusing our tastebuds while complicating and confronting the
boundaries of her text through a rhetoric of travel. In turn, Woolf is trying to represent
consciousness as a flow of new and fresh air, using character as a malleable, plastic as
material.

LOCATING THE ‘NEW’ SELF:
“Out of the country and myself I go” (Hazlitt)
In his essay “Imagination and Sympathy: Sterne and Adam Smith,” Kenneth
MacLean describes how sympathy “[flashes] upon the screen of consciousness an image,
or picture, of the suffering condition of another” (MacLean 401). Sterne and Woolf
foreground the tension between the static image – the weekend away’s “snapshot pictures
of people” (The Years 341) – and the dynamic linearity of the written sentence. In turn,
form expands and becomes a process: the journey and not merely the markers of
departure and destination. While Sterne relishes this freedom, Woolf is pre-occupied by
creating an overarching shape: “Suppose one can keep the quality of a sketch in a
finished and composed work? That is my endeavor” (DII 312). In the pen of a writer
who is enthralled by “wandering,” inherently dematerialized consciousnesses and
skirmishes with apparent formlessness are recurrent. She admires this sympathetic
balancing of formal stasis and motion in Sterne: “The utmost fluidity exists with the
utmost permanence”(‘The 'Sentimental Journey'’ 404). Yorick in Journal to Eliza
converses with his beloved’s literal “sweet Picture”(113), which is “eloquent” precisely
because it is also composed of his pen-strokes, a sympathetic ‘arrangement’ of words.
He offers “the present Picture of myself” in the text’s framing margins, but states that he
has not “varied in one Lineament, from the first Sitting – to this last”; his assertion of the

36
fixity of his love simultaneously extends the singular image into a series of sittings that
travel over time.
The ‘rigid’ image is made partial and provisional, just as the meaning of a phrase
and a sentence is accumulated through individual words: “take it as a Sample of what I
ever shall be…”(Sentimental Traveller 139). Movement through a text, much like
movement through time, allows for shifts of change to occur. Originally induced in them
by the author, reading character is an “image-creating process”, a continual present
participle of the kind Woolf liberally uses. In Mrs. Dalloway, Clarissa’s engagement with
the woman she peers at through her window represents an additional engagement of
imaginative blind space:
She was going to bed, in the room opposite. It was fascinating to watch her,
moving about, that old lady, crossing the room, coming to the window. Could she
see her? It was fascinating, with people still laughing and shouting in the
drawing-room, to watch that old man, quiet quietly, going to bed. She pulled the
blind now. (186)
Every participle is a present participle, enhancing Woolf’s authoritative specificity
towards time and movement. Not as much fixed in scenes, but ebbed in her characters,
Woolf’s approach to movement and time as a stream of consciousnesses is risky, for it
runs the risk of drowning her characters due to the lack of ‘traditional’ character.
Similarly, in Jacob’s Room, snapshots of London scenery are set in motion by the
durative process of reading: “pictures in a book whose pages we turn over and over as if
we should at last find what we look for” (96); the destination of full sympathetic
engagement is deferred by the conditional “as if”. But Woolf’s imagination is neither
passive nor stagnant; it is active, transforming the objects of her attention into something
mutilated by actual reality; observation itself in turn distorts the image. When Orlando

37
makes her way out of the city in her car, Sharon Ouditt sees “something which seems to
imitate the ‘tracking shot’ taken from the perspective of the moving vehicle” (151):
Long vistas steadily shrunk together. Here was a market. Here was a funeral. Here
a procession with banners upon which was written ‘Ra—UN’, but what else?
Meat was very red. Butchers stood at the door. Women almost had their heels
sliced off. Amor Vin—that was over a porch. . . . Nothing could be seen whole or
read from start to finish. (Orlando 275)
Finally, the last chapter of Orlando, with its insistence on movement and instability, is a
translation of Woolf’s fascination with speed (she was fond of driving). She was aware
that the cinema, with its “speed and slowness, dartlike directness and vaporous
circumlocution” (‘The Cinema’ 271), had the ability to move the spectator both literally
and figuratively. “The (e)motive power of the moving pictures” critic Floriane RevironPiegay states, “is perhaps the kind of effect she meant to achieve in Orlando : hence the
concatenation of ideas, thoughts, emotions, and movements in the last chapter.” When at
Marshall and Snelgrove’s, Orlando takes a lift for the first time and is
shot smoothly upwards. The very fabric of life now, she thought as she rose, is
magic. In the eighteenth century, we knew how everything was done; but here I
rise through the air; I listen to voices in America; I see men flying—but how it’s
done, I can’t even begin to wonder. So my belief in magic returns. . . . Each time
the lift stopped and flung its doors open, there was another slice of the world
displayed with all the smells of that world clinging to it.
In Woolf’s short story ‘Sympathy’ (1919), she admits that there is a “blind
moment” beyond the limits of her sympathetic engagement with her characters: she can
“see” Celia “and then not” (103). This syntactical pivoting recurs when Woolf imagines
Celia as “a widow; or she is not.” Celia’s black mourning weeds give way to the “white
from head to foot.” As Celia and the narrator move through the sentence, the image not
only alters but undoes itself, just as Shandy’s end chronologically undoes its beginning.

38
She is “forced” to admit that these visions and revisions risk derailing the journey of
sympathy: “The outward sign I see and shall see for ever; but at the meaning of it I shall
only guess” (‘Sympathy’108). Hazlitt observes that “if we paint one set of objects” on
the “the canvas of the fancy…they immediately efface every other” (‘On Going A
Journey’ 258), and while Sterne picks and discards characters and scenes at will, Woolf is
uncomfortable with merely “passing through,” for she sees her characters with E.M.
Forster’s later critical eye: “They [the characters] speak no more to us or to one another
as soon as the page is turned” (‘Virginia Woolf’ 229).
As a miniature representation of the larger problem Woolf has in composing her
fiction, single moments of time lack the unity of roundness. “Images” of sympathy are
insufficient because they lie flat in the mind and because they cannot turn into rounded
knowledge. In turn, character and form for both Sterne and Woolf must be made threedimensional in the landscape of narrative literally mapped out in the jagged lines of
Tristram Shandy’s “misadventures and cross accidents” (7) or Woolf’s London parks,
shops and streets. In the eighteenth-century editions of Sterne’s novel the force of the
type’s impress upon the page literally indents language, giving the work its own texturaltextual landscape. Woolf states of the biographical context for Shandy: “these are merely
marks on the surface, and the source from which they sprang lies very deep” (‘Sterne’
283), alerting us to the undulations of the psyche that we plunge into as well as dart
across. The use of repetitive semi-colons helps develop the act of plunging and darting—
zigzagging-, for Woolf envisages her mind as a receptacle and not just a flat canvas when
she writes Mrs. Dalloway.

39
Like Sterne, Woolf’s movement through the text allows her to offer multiple images
or versions of her characters, redrafting them as she writes, as though being seduced by
new untrodden tracks not on the London tube map. Woolf in turn applies this pattern to
reading, in 1931 writing, “New impressions are always completing or cancelling the old.
One’s judgment is suspended, for one does not know what is coming next” (‘The Love of
Reading’ 271). This runs the risk, though, of “frittering and dribbling away” the
continuity of a clearly-delineated character – a fixed point of ‘discovery’ the writer and
reader can aim towards.
In Mrs. Dalloway, Peter Walsh’s imagining of capturing the girl he follows through
the park attempts to encapsulate feeling in one still image, and still, it constantly shifts as
the narrator provides more of his “thoughts”:
.…he started after her to follow this woman, this excitement, which
seemed even with its back turn to shed on him a light which connected them,
which singled him out […]
But she’s not married; shes young; quite young, thought Peter […]
She was not worldly, like Clarrissa […]
Still if she stopped he would say “Come have an ice,” he would say, and she
would answer, perfectly simply, “Oh yes.” […]
(61)
Likewise, in Sentimental Journey, Yorick’s imagining of the captive in Paris attempts to
encapsulate feeling in one still image – “I was in a right frame” to “take his picture” – but
it constantly shifts as he gives “full scope to my imagination” (61):
I beheld his body half wasted away[…]and felt what kind of sickness of the
heart it was which arises from hope deferr’d. Upon looking nearer I saw him
pale and feverish[…]
But here my heart began to bleed – and I was forced to go on with another
part of the portrait[...]
He gave a deep sigh – I saw the iron enter into his soul – I burst into tears – I
could not sustain the picture of confinement which my fancy had drawn…

40
Yorick offers a series of aborted impressions; the subject of sympathy, like the captive’s
hope, is the destination always “deferr’d” to the Hazlittean horizon the writer and reader
never quite reach. He is “forced” to keep relocating in his actual mental picture, and just
when he does attain the physical sympathetic response of tears, the mind-forged image of
captivity paradoxically escapes him: it is a mirage. As in Orlando’s meta-textual
dimension with three layers of meaning, the manuscript draft of Pointz Hall metatextually enacts Woolf’s anxiousness over indeterminate forms as the insight that Miss La
Trobe “always wanted to make something important to stabilize what was essentially
fugitive at the moment” (82) is the last legible sentence because “The remainder of the
page is mutilated”. Like Yorick’s evasive captive, Woolf’s description of a motor-car
drive in ‘An evening over Sussex’ laments how the landscape
was escaping all the time[…]Gone, gone; over, over; past and done with, past
and done with[…]We have been over that stretch, and are already forgotten.
(‘The Death of the Moth’ 26)
While Woolf creates imaginative settings of intense shape and texture, the landscape
often surrounds our emotions and constitutes a certain weight within images and symbols
that directly and indirectly imply meaning. Comprised of remembered and forgotten
memories, Woolf’s work dictates inexact feeling-- something dappled and verging on
being forgotten, subdued for reader and writer alike.

In her fiction, Woolf explicitly links form and character as sympathetic
companions on the narrative journey, blending into each other: “it is to express
character,” she states in her 1924 essay, “Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown,” “that the form of
the novel, so clumsy, verbose, and undramatic, so rich, elastic, and alive, has been

41
evolved” (DII 282). However, as it first appears, The Waves seems to blend her
characters too much into one another, yet when she notes about Sterne that “A
Sentimental Journey is a succession of portraits” (‘Sterne’ 285), her movement through
tableaux of character in The Waves is self-reflective. Concomitantly, Sterne’s Shandy
was written and published as a “succession” of nine volumes over nine years.
In The Waves, glimpses of character are unfolded to the audience delicately; we
are aware of each, even, when they are silent or missing from the narrative, an awareness
tuned to the silence under their speech, movement without action, and flickering of that
inmost plane of personality, whose place is often vacant even in a novel of “character.”
In turn, she is able to show life in a texture that matches it: “The substance of life, as we
are accustomed to see it in fiction, is transposed and the form of the novel is transmuted
to match it,” one critic notes. The six characters are stranded together as a band of
friends—three male, three female— whose voices Woolf zigzags through. Their timescale begins in an offset childhood spring and ends in a later unspecific winter of their
lives. In unison, all that they feel and do is revealed through their own words. Each is
alone with himself, but excessively aware of the others; in the middle and again at the
end, they reunite as a group, and finally Bernard—the character most eloquent with
words—creates the entire perspective of the group within the novel.
Woolf imitates the selective process by which we know and recollect one another,
the world, and ourselves, enhancing her characters’ movements through scenery while
timing them as if real. The created impressions, the scratches on the brain, are
incongruent; events occur simultaneously, as when Peter Walsh and Reitza are forced to

42
share ‘air-time’ in Regents Park. The relationships between the characters are not
certain, but the dramatic shifts of subjective consciousness are apparent.
In writing, for one consciousness to be represented, an ‘other’ must be absent.
However, Woolf’s technique does not extinguish technique doesn’t dissipate Clarissa’s
existence entirely when she exits the page; her existence is merely temporarily displaced,
held onto, at times, in a clause designated by semi-colons. Punctuation is not the only
tool Woolf uses in order to create a formal shift of consciousnesses, for objects too are
prominent linking devises: the motor cars on Bond Street, the airplane writing in the, the
hourly chimes of Big Ben each serve to create a connecting between characters. In these
moments, a different mind or character is able to reposition the camera, and in turn
replace whichever mind was currently being scribbled by the pen, as when readers
initially follow Clarissa to the flower shop and are abruptly shifted to multiple
consciousnesses and then to Septimus’ consciousness after everyone, simultaneously,
hears a car:
And as [Clarissa] began to go with Miss Pyn from jar to jar, choosing, nonsense,
nonsense, she said to herself, more and more gently, as if this beauty, this scent,
this colour, and Miss Pyn liking her, trusting her, were a wave which she let flow
over her and surmount that hatred, that monster, surmount it all; and it lifter her
up and down when—oh! A pistol shot in the street outside! […]
The violent explosion which made Mrs. Dalloway jump and Miss Pyn go
to the window and apologise came from a motor car which had drawn to the side
of the pavement precisely opposite Mulberry’s shop window. Passers-by who, of
course, stopped and stared, has just time to see […] Yet rumors were at once in
circulation […] Edgar J. Watkiss, with his roll of lead piping round his arm, said
audibly, humorously of course: ‘The Proime Minister’s kyar.’
Septimus Warren Smith, who found himself unable to pass, heard him.
Septimus Warren Smith, ages about thirty, pale-faces, beak-nosed,
wearing brown shoes and a shabby overcoat, with hazel eyes which had the look
of apprehension in them which makes complete strangers apprehensive too. The
world has raised its whip; where will it descend?
Everything has come to a standstill.
(13-14)

43
How the characters connect is suspended in time, for even though Clarissa and Septimus
never meet, they are joined through an internal experience that is “publically” exposed:
Like the omniscient narrators of Vanity Fair, Middlemarch, or The Last Chronicle
of Barset, the omniscient narrator of Mrs. Dalloway is a general consciousness or
social mind which rises into existence out of the collective mental experience of
the individual human beings in the story.
(Miller 56)
The passage also suggests that an objects function is capable of being extended beyond
its object-symbol association through the mastery of both time and space. Although
objects and ideas may seem artificial in their ability to link characters and enclose a text,
Woolf’s emphasis is an “adult-won victory over urban complexity,” for it is a victory
over the ideas and symbols that are affiliated with the use and meaning of the image and
word “motor car.”

Creating shifts in narrative through her seemingly fragmented Sternian structure,
Woolf is able to both connect the minds of the narrators to the minds of the characters to
the landscapes they move through and reflect the workings of imagination. Woolf’s
method of creating characters that are interrupted and dispersed further explores what, in
the Sternian moral, is the human tendency and process on self-fashioning one another and
oneself. In other words, identity is often found through role-play—characters literally
cast themselves into roles, just as when Clarissa returns from her room during her party to
fulfill her role as a hostess.
It is precisely because of the fluidity and symmetry of arrangement that one can
summarize the novel as such; however, the substance should not be divided from its
form, for the form has been evoked by the essence of the novel, in so for as the

44
“substance” is too ponderous a phrase for the lives within the work. Woolf envisages her
mind as a receptacle and not just a flat canvas when she writes that The Waves will
“embody, at last, the exact shapes my brain holds” (DIV 53), and how her “tunneling”
technique discovered during her composition of Mrs. Dalloway enabled her to penetrate
“the richest strata of my mind” (DII 69). While in The Waves the reader accepts each
character as unique and idiosyncratic, at a distance, the characters begin to blur into one.
The careful formality of diction is common to all six of them, and often requires attentive
reading to deduce who is actually speaking or doing. The rhythm scarcely falters as
Woolf moves smoothly from Bernard to Neville to Louis – as if the narrative is the actual
product of a single consciousness, artificially divided into six voices.
Nevertheless, each speech-style is pointedly “personalized” to reinforce its
uniqueness (and difference), in order to emphasize the cognitive process of fusing the
various characters and landscapes into a single unity. Woolf assigns certain verbal
formulas to each character, whose appearance becomes an instant indicator of the
speaker. When Rhoda speaks, for example, “The door opens and the tiger leaps” (72) or
Neville, “Death among the apple-trees” (12), the effect is to narrow the breadth of each
character, pare down his individual multiplicity to render him recognizably ‘different’ to
the reader.
Furthermore, the arguably most pivotal moment in The Waves can be when Louis,
as a child, states, “I hold the stalk in my hand. I am the stalk” (4), for up to this point, the
children's discourse has been wholly focused on the external world and their perceptions
of it—“I see a ring” (1), “I hear a sound” (2)—in which their focus is directed entirely
outwards, for if they have any sense of an 'I', it is only as a conduit for external images

45
and sounds. As the chorus of voices proceeds, and the children become gradually more
aware of their own bodies with the mentions of “feet” (11) and “hand” (5) and “ear” (4)
beginning to enter their speech, their focus shifts towards an exploration of their
reciprocal relationship with the outside world – an understanding that they can affect
their surroundings, just as it can affect them, such as the dew dampening Jinny's palm or
the stones chilling Neville's feet (2). The children begin to realize their character and
develop self-hood in the same time frame that readers do. Here, their sense of character
unfolds from page to page as quickly as our sense of them is manifested. However, it is
not until this point that Louis's remark indicates an abrupt redirection, or zigzag, of
attention inwards. 'I hold' is followed – and, in a sense, replaced – by 'I am'; the question
of 'the self' and what precisely it is has displaced enquiry into the external. Yet the
question remains prompted by the stalk, as an external, non-self object.
A Lacanian interpretation, viewing this moment as representative of 'the mirror
stage', might suggest that the stalk here replaces mirror-reflections or images of the
mother's face to become the 'other', the external image which Louis has taken as the
gestalt of his developing idea of selfhood. The declaration 'I am the stalk' is a tacit
annexation of the stalk's identity for himself; it is a comprehensible, perceptible physical
entity upon which he can model his own psyche and, subsequently, come to understand
it. Particularly notable here is the implied simultaneity of these two states of being. Both
sentences acquire identical immediacy from the present tense; firmly bounded by full
stops, the periods leave no room for 'then' or 'so' between them to portray the latter
declaration of personal identity as a progression or development from the former. Louis is
the entity holding the stalk, as well as the stalk itself. The similar structure of the

46
sentences implies that, in some form, they merely expound two facets of the same notion.
Not only is the self, then, 'multiple,' but also diffuses at this time in the narrative beyond
the boundaries of the individual human body, including and inhabiting the external, non-I
object of the stalk. Woolf's writing expands on this idea of the self as something
'multiple' and unbounded.
The self, then, is a place where multiple beings reside, Louis echoing, “I am the
little ape who chatters over a nut...I am also the caged tiger, and you are the keepers with
red-hot bars” (71). While the words “Bars”, “caged” and “zoo” all imply enclosure, a
discrete, individual self is hemmed in from the rest of the world, though it may be
multifarious (ape as well as tiger) within its own boundaries. The Waves seems to almost
contradict this idea; its central conceit approaches the French conception of unanimity4
from the early twentieth-century, uniting six different minds into a single consciousness,
rather than dividing a single mind 'against itself'. In turn, it actually reverses the assumed
method.
Therefore, by unifying the six discrete ‘selves,’ a larger, communal 'self' is
formed. Woolf strings her characters together with a common diction so that they
become 'a single flower' with six petals: an entity that is an independent whole, yet
inherently multiple in composition. Here, as with Louis and his stalk, the sense of self
has spilled over from the bounds of the individual human body to encompass the nonself, as manifested in one's environment, and in other people. As in Woolf's short story,
'Lappin and Lapinova’ (1938), the identifying feature of the parents-in-law is that they
are adorned with yellow for their golden wedding anniversary, which then seeps into their
very surroundings in which the entire kingdom is gold. They form part of a unified

47
environment in which “Everything was gold:” “a gold-edged card with gold initials
intertwined...a plate of clear golden fluid”(‘Lappin and Lapinova’ 260). Woolf's phrase
for the result is “a golden mesh.” Mesh allows for the object to be seen and understood
yet creates a new screen of meaning and implication; as an “object,” the “plate” still can
have the function of a surface one eats from, but when being gold it could perhaps
transform into an object not meant to be the surface one eats from, or let alone touched.
The figure of the “mesh” mimics the interconnecting webs and filaments which
run through Mrs. Dalloway; together with 'edged' and 'intertwined', it creates a world
where the 'selves' of the parents-in-law pervade their surroundings, drawing them
together in a single unity under a communal environment. And, just as Louis requires the
external entity of the stalk to provide a pattern for comprehending his own identity,
participation in the 'six-sided flower' of unanimistic discourse is the means by which
Bernard becomes aware of his own 'multiple' self in his statement, “With them I am
many-sided” (64). The similarity of the terminology tacitly positions him, the individual,
as a microcosm of the larger, multi-sided community. In a sense, as he contributes to the
unified, public sense of self, the others complete, and complicate, his own personal
identity by becoming part of it. The unification of the diverse becomes, ironically, the
means and process by which the individual is diversified.
However, with this multiplicity of self/ selves comes a preoccupation with ideas
of fragmentation and disintegration. In this regard, the six-sided flower, as a symbol for
individual and communal conceptions of self, is revisited/repeated later in The Waves. In
‘Lappin and Lapinova,’ the chrysanthemums form “tight balls” (258), the petals curling
together and defying disintegration. They metonymically represent the unified 'golden

48
mesh' of the extended self of which they are part, the massive, impenetrable structure of
Thorburnhood that the “insoluble” Rosalind cannot penetrate or undo. Likewise, in the
short story 'Happiness', the character Stuart expresses his sense of a cohesive, “unified”
self through the image of the many-petalled flower: “he was compact of many petals laid
firmly and closely on top of each other all reddened, all warmed through, all tinged with
this inexplicable glow” (173). “Laid” implies that the skilful tessellation of petals, being
“firmly and closely,” is the work of a higher command, for it suggests purpose and
intention. The triple repetition of the word “all” insists on collection, or the 'unity' of his
multiple parts or petals. Readers later learn that when “he stooped a petal fell”
(‘Happiness’ 172), implying the sense of potential fragmentation, or at minimum, a
temporarily deferred form that is clearly implicit in the innate multiplicity of the
structure.
In the present of the novel, the singularity of the falling petal, being the only petal
that has fallen from the bunch, primarily draws attention to the unity of the rest. As when
Septimus Smith is first introduced in Mrs. Dalloway, his difference from the other
characters’ consciousnesses shows his difference while illuminating their unity. In doing
so, it also gently establishes the intact “flower” of selfhood that readers assume as merely
the prelude to an inevitable or complete dissolution. Unity is a temporary phenomenon
while fragmentation is the default status of the self, to which it will, inevitably, return.
As a writer with an imperfectly formed sense of self, or, at least, an acknowledger
of “imperfect” sympathy, Woolf cyclically fails to give her characters a ‘face.’ In The
Waves, Rhoda attempts to symbolically perform this process of self-creation through her
“fallen petals,” while the process in 'Happiness' is reversed: rather than a innately

49
centered, unified entity which is beginning to fragment, Rhoda's bowl of petals is a
uncentered collection of fragments. When the process is “reversed,” Woolf asks, in ‘The
Sentimental Traveller,’ “and a waist coat button is made the centre of branching avenues
of thought, do we feel that they strike inevitably from the spot of heat in the middle? […]
That is slipshod thinking, and if it does stumble on the truth we feel inclined to
congratulate ourselves on the accident. The question as to what exactly distinguishes the
truth from the falsehoods in such work is a delicate one, and the value of the book
depends entirely upon our immediate certainty” (158). The togetherness of the petals is
wholly artificial, a belated attempt by Rhoda to return them to the 'unity' they possessed
previously, before the flowers they composed disintegrated. The petals float, separate and
'scattered'. They form, in the basin, a failed witches' brew; its components cannot
magically cohere into the desired whole.
Similarly, Rhoda's psyche remains essentially fragmented. She lacks a center
around which to construct her identity: “there is no single scent, no single body for me to
follow” (73), she states, implying that her sense of “self” is, in similar regards to Julia
Kristeva’s propositions, “semiotic.” It is “feminine”: 'multiple', incoherent, non-linear.
In “Happiness,” Stuart Elton's sense of self, in contrast, is of the symbolic order –
centered and ordered by an external system of codes that dictate its regular arrangement
of “rosy flakes round a bright light.” As Clarissa Dalloway’s role as a domestic woman,
she understand who she is, yet there still remains an aspect that is false, which in turn
begs the question of if she even believes in her identity.
Woolf’s biographical subject/object Roger Fry discusses how the receiver of an
artwork must “pass outside it to other things necessary to complete its unity”(‘Life and

50
Art’, 20); the reader is hauled along on the narrative journey but this zigzagging inside
and outside the text – between the artist’s self-substitution and the critic’s selfconsciousness – disorientates the reader. Sterne constructs his readers as an audience for
Shandy’s spectacle of himself and simultaneously as companion-travellers within the
narrative: he speaks to and with them. Woolf, on the other hand, takes a similar role
when she becomes both a critic and a novelist. Like T.S. Eliot’s critical work, Woolf’s
critical essays help create her readership. Her essays act as foils to her work so that eager
readers can be taught. As Woolf well knew, her desire to be free could potentially create
a misunderstanding in narrative translation.
Woolf notes that Shandy’s punctuation “brings the sound and associations of the
speaking voice in with it”(402), and Shandy himself tells us that “Writing[…]is but a
different name for conversation”(109). However, the illusoriness of this analogy is
daunting, for narrative cannot be taken ‘in turns’ by reader and writer: “The reader may
indeed be walking a road with Tristram, but his mouth has been securely taped
shut”(Pratt 395). Indeed, Shandean humour lies in the author’s self-conscious awareness
of this fact and the narrator’s obliviousness of it. The reader is incorporated into the text
as an inquisitive interlocutor, but this welcoming in allows Sterne to mould and thereby
control his potential critics. Shandy’s interlocutor constantly shifts, from an individual
who – Orlando-like – alternates sex, to the collective “your worships” and the universal
“all mankind”(15). His syntax shifts uncomfortably between the individual, collective
and generic “you”, displacing our conception of ourselves in and in relation to the text:
I know there are readers in the world, as well as many other good people in it,
who are no readers at all,- who find themselves ill at ease, unless they are let
into the whole secret[…]of everything which concerns you.
(ibid:8)

51

“I” here is set against the third person plural “readers”, “themselves”, “they”, which in
turn is set against the undefined “you”; it is uncertain whether Shandy refers to himself,
to an individual auditor in the text, to a generalised “one”, or to the “good” reader to
whom Shandy will exclusively address himself. In Sentimental Journey Yorick laments
the “boundaries and fences to circumscribe the discontent of man”(Jack and Parnell
throughout:8) distinguishing foreigners from natives, the initiated from the uninitiated.
But Shandy’s seemingly arbitrary zigzagging between intimate and formal registers – the
conversation and the autobiography – further waylays the reader. We are “perfect
strangers”(New:11) despite knowing the intricacies of his conception at the outset, but
are assured:
As you proceed further with me, the slight acquaintance which is now
beginning betwixt us, will grow into familiarity; and that, unless one of us is in
fault, will terminate in friendship.
(ibid)
The phrases “with me” and “betwixt us” imply shared sympathy, but “friendship” is
jarringly juxtaposed with “terminate”, the abortive imagery denying an organic growth of
good feeling. The tentatively-posited “us” is singularized into “one of us”, cyclically
returning to the opening clause’s distinction between “you” and “me”. Yet in the same
chapter, Shandy invokes the reader as “my dear friend and companion”, with whom he
will “trifle upon the road”(11). Woolf’s typical third-person narratives do not allow her
to so explicitly challenge the reader, but in The Journal of Mistress Joan Martyn – a rare
first-person escapade – she plays a similar Sternean game of offering and denying
intimacy. She picks up and deposits names as she motors through the short story: Joan
Martyn, Rosamond Merridew, Dame Elizabeth Partridge, Dame Elinor, John Martyn.

52
The reader is immediately disorientated by the expectation of intimacy with the ‘Joan
Martyn’ of the title and the opening sentence’s introduction to ‘Rosamond Merridew’ as
our guide. Indeed, Rosamond utters a teasing Shandean self-reflexive sentence that
transgresses the author/persona boundary: “There are certain rules in the game of the
antiquary of which the first and simplest is that you must not state your object at the first
encounter”(36). The reader only eventually reaches Joan’s voice via Rosamond’s and the
direct speech of the Martyns first. Even then she is not a fixed point of arrival, with the
subdivision of the narrative into sections admitting the possibility of doubled voices as
the reader struggles to determine who is speaking. At the start of Section Four - “I was
stopped in the midst of such reflections”(51) – we are unsure if Joan is still speaking, or
Rosamond has reassumed control of the narrative.
These tricks of perspective reveal both authors’ preoccupation with and discomfort
over reception – who is allowed on the journey with the writer and characters and at what
distance they should be kept. A scenic walk should be more enjoyable with company,
but the reader threatens to weigh them down. In this sense both writers subscribe to the
Romantic aesthetic of solitary wandering articulated by Hazlitt:
…comparing of notes interferes with the involuntary impression of things upon
the mind…For once, I like to have it all my own way…eventful moments in our
lives’ history are too precious…to be frittered and dribbled away in imperfect
sympathy.
On going a journey’, 182-3)
Sharing the journey with a critical reader who does not appreciate the landscape threatens
to dilute the narrative’s intensity; in publishing – the retrospective of spontaneous writing
– the author cannot “have it all my own way”. In Journal to Eliza – the charting of
Sterne’s real-life love for Elizabeth Draper – Sterne demonstrates “imperfect sympathy”
with the reader and his persona by distancing himself from Yorick’s outpourings:

53
This Journal wrote under the fictitious Names of Yorick and Draper[…]a Diary
of the miserable feelings of a person separated from a Lady…
The real Names – are foreigne – and the Account a Copy from a French
Manuscript…
(107)
The indefinite article renders “a person” and “a Lady” anonymous and de-located in time
and space, a distancing compounded by the text’s fabricated status as a copy of a foreign
manuscript. Fact and fiction commingle in Elizabeth Draper’s real name being classed as
“fictitious”, but “Yorick” is a name Sterne repeatedly hides behind, his own sermons
being attributed to this persona.
Woolf’s version of “imperfect sympathy” is the reader’s becoming too self-conscious
about the writer’s attempt to elicit fellow-feeling. Sterne himself says that “an author
must feel himself, or his reader will not”(Letters 285), but Woolf disparages Sentimental
Journey for its “affectation of simplicity”(285) and draws attention to Sterne’s critical
revisions as an indicator that his methods are far from “arbitrary”. In The Waves
Bernard’s imagined letter to the object of his affections are a commentary upon Sterne’s
seemingly spontaneous, but in fact well-rehearsed, narrative technique:
…she must think [it] was written without a pause, without an erasure. Look
how unformed the letters are – there is a careless blot...I will write a quick,
running, small hand, exaggerating the down stroke of the “y” and crossing the
“t” thus – with a dash.
(57-8)
Bernard must be seen “to be passing from thing to thing with the greatest ease in the
world” like a gallivanting Shandy. Woolf like Bernard admires stylistic abandon and
inclusiveness, but the technical precision of the shape and size of letters – borne along by
the obligatory Shandean dash – indicates the danger that it is no more than an aesthetic in
the hands of such a self-conscious author. Bernard breaks off from the letter not for fear
that the “effusiveness” is artificial, but that it reveals itself as such. Woolf hopes for

54
unselfconscious sympathetic substitution with character, but Sterne is the constant
presence reminding her that writing is a representation – a display – of thought

To return to ‘Lappin and Lapinova,’ one will find that the text represents an
attempt, by the female figure of Rosalind, to project her semiotic being into this symbolic
unity of self – to find a way of identifying herself in line with the symbolic, societal
codes which will dictate her existence as Mrs. Ernest Thorburn, similar to Mrs.
Dalloway’s title. The kingdom of Lappin and Lapinova is organized according to certain
established rules, almost like the rules of English society in Mrs. Dalloway: “There were
the black rabbits and the red; there were the enemy rabbits and the friendly.” Woolf’s
works hold their own moral laws, whether they are real or unreal is not necessarily the
point. However, the hierarchy is simple, couched in the language of childhood along
well-trodden fairytale patterns—“they were King and Queen”—providing, in turn, an
intermediary space between her idea of her new, formal life of “the Albert Memorial,
mahogany sideboards, steel engravings”; symbolic imagery of government, death,
regulation and hardness around which this existence is constructed, and her life as an
unmarried girl, the familiar, cozy world of “her tame rabbit at home”. She constructs her
identity much like how Clarissa Dalloway constructs hers. It is a territory in which she
can interact with her husband Ernest on terms which are agreeable to both. She can
simultaneously act out the symbolic codes of conduct which she fears, practicing, in a
sense, the process of being her husband’s wife, Queen to his King, in order to protect
herself from those codes as they are manifested in “the rest of the world,” or the
expectations of the Thorburns.

55
Moreover, her role-play as Lapinova enables her to displace her multiple
identities as ‘wife’, ‘daughter-in-law’, ‘Mrs. Ernest Thorburn’ into a single, new identity:
that of the ‘wary and undependable’ hare, a facet of self defined by its indefinability.
Increasing the multiplicity of her self to include Lapinova, therefore, becomes a means by
which she can impose a sense of unity upon her existence. Role-play allows for a
‘collected’ self under which all categories can fall, even those fixed in fantasy. However,
the redrafting of character through role-play only works in singular intervals; one cannot
be all in a single instant, but can acquire differences over time.
Notable, also, is the way in which ‘Lappin and Lapinova’ presents identity and
self in terms of territory and personal space. The outlines of the fantasy world, which
lacks any existence outside the cookie-cutter identities, are very carefully delineated:
“The stream at the bottom, where our wood meets the black wood.” Ernest’s blank nonrecognition of the territory—“What stream?”-- initiates the decline of the fantasy (much
like Woolf’s “What characters?”), and the eventual death of Rosalind’s identity as
Lapinova. Dwelling-places therefore become manifested in Woolf’s writing as
depositories of identity. However, this is not clearly stated elsewhere: in ‘Street
Haunting: A London Adventure’ (1930), Woolf suggests that one’s room is an inadequate
or incomplete symbol of self: “As we step out of the house…we shed the self our friends
know us by”(160). The implication is of many selves, only one of which is represented
by the room in a process that marginalizes the others. In the domestic space, what Walter
Benjamin calls “auratic objects” – for instance, “the blue and white china bowl” – accrete
around the self, expounding certain elements of experience while concealing others. Like
the street itself, therefore, the self is ‘at once revealed and obscured’ by these solid

56
objects. Removed from this space, therefore, is akin to a stripping; one loses all sense of
self except that of “a central oyster of perceptiveness, an enormous eye.” The self is
returned to the pre-verbal stages depicted at the beginning of The Waves, where unfiltered
perception preceded awareness of inner being. But is Woolf playing on words here? Is
the phrase ‘an enormous I’ simultaneously existent here? Does the act of leaving the
domestic space permit one’s identity to expand – to become more multiple and various?
Certainly, the return to the domestic space imposes a compulsory ‘unity’ upon the
“streaked, variegated” self, for “When he opens his door in the evening,” Woolf writes, a
man must choose from the limited range of clearly defined selves implicit in “banker,
golfer, husband, father” (‘Street Haunting: A London Adventure’ 163). Overlap and
expansion are forbidden; the multiplicity of the self is denied.

Woolf assembles her people, places and things slowly so that when small parts
become whole, they reflect the time frame of a dawning consciousness, suggesting that
the character of consciousness likewise needs to be present in the narrative.

In Mrs.

Dalloway, Woolf begins with a whole and then begins to un-pack it. She uses London as
her breeding ground. Woolf even un-packs the date of the text; the manner in The novel
begins with June, London, a woman, yet manages to manifest and disperse itself here and
there-- to Burton, to the war, to India--, only to be recollected later into a single day in a
certain part of London, in a certain life of a certain woman. Collection is necessary in
unifying the whole.

57
Readers must, in a sense, discover the boundary they are confined to. Upon
finding the date and time frame, this boundary is set in place. To assemble specific
‘time,’ we must collect suggestive time references as we move along the narrative
journey. In Mrs. Dalloway, readers first discover that it is first June (6), then a
Wednesday in June (19), and finally a Wednesday in June in 1923 (80). Woolf begins
with “June” only to narrow our knowledge of June to a single day. Likewise, the novel
begins with June, London, and a woman, yet manages to disperse itself across the globe
and to different months and years.
Her ramblings seem to gloss over the topography of her place, London, while her
characters ramble their way down the pages and streets alike as if from her short story
‘Street Haunting: A London Adventure’. Both time and place in her novel imply
“incredible flux,” (Lamont 165) for as she notes in her journal, “The ease & rapidity of
life in London a good deal impressed me” (DII 55). Likewise, historical London of 1923
is mimetic in its dealings with the newly ended first world war. Although the novel
concentrates on “one moment in June,” Woolf goes to great lengths to present a historical
London, in great transition, both at home and in colonies abroad: the tomb of the
Unknown Warrior, built at Westminster Abbey in 1920, by which many characters walk
during the course of the novel, and other new features of London public ideology were
still unfamiliar to the London landscape. The novel opens as Clarissa stands poised on
Bond Street, waiting to cross Victoria Street to finish her pre-party errands. These places
in London, notoriously hurried by movement and business, simultaneously evoke and
serve as metonyms for the staid affluence of the upper-class British family and solid
military power of the Empire. Within Clarissa, Woolf manages to capture the dialects of

58
dwelling and travel, stasis and motion, within one persona, a motif that extends to Mrs.
Ramsey in To The Lighthouse.
Narratorial zigzagging reflects a see-sawing authorial mind with respect to control
over aesthetic processes. Just as Sterne’s characters pivot between his oft-repeated tenet
that provided the character “keeps along the line of his story,” “he may go backwards and
forwards as he will”(345), aware that the mind can be “torn asunder by two projects of
equal strength, both obstinately pulling in a contrary direction at the same time”(301),
Shandy and the lovelorn Yorick want to immerse themselves and their audience in their
emotionally-strident narratives, fearing the kind of “dying” that Woolf always envisaged
for her own completed novels. Ruth Whittaker observes that, for serious and humorous
effect/affect, Sterne “tries to outwit…a sense of time’s passing” (89).
However, Sterne does weary of Shandy’s authorial antics as the years and
volumes pass, literally diminishing them in the slimmer ninth Volume. Sterne
foreshadows his eventual jadedness with the journey when he modifies the galloping
metaphor: “by treading the same steps over and over again, they presently make a road of
it, as plain and as smooth as a garden-walk…” (Tristram Shandy 2). Retracing our steps
through any work runs the risk of eroding the joyful “momentaneous” abandon that first
engaged the reader’s sympathy. In ‘The Journal of Mistress Joan Martyn’ (1906) Woolf
alludes to the same risk in John’s “level” voice, “as of one who tells a tale so well known
that the words have been rubbed smooth of meaning”(40); the exertion and exhaustion of
revision for Woolf indicate her own despair at the thought that the journey will never end.

59

INVENTORY
That illusion of a world so shaped that it echoes every groan of human beings so tied
together by common needs and fears that a twitch at one wrist jerks another, where
however strange your experience other people have had it too, where however far you
travel in your own mind someone has been there before you—is all an illusion. We do
not know our own souls, let alone the souls of others. ... In illness this make-believe
ceases.
(‘On Being Ill’)
Like holiday snaps accumulated in an album, Woolf seeks to eventually gather up the
“odds and ends within us” (Orlando 73) that she acquires during her travels through
narrative. She takes part in a personal adventure, in which her works represent her
continual process toward self-recognition (Lawall 197). In an almost rebellious manner,
Woolf begins to unpack her authorial accoutrements as she goes along just as Sterne does
in his “Chapter on THINGS”:
I have a thing to name – a thing to lament – a thing to hope – a thing to promise,
and a thing to threaten – I have a thing to suppose – a thing to declare – a thing
to conceal – a thing to chase, and a thing to pray for...
(The Life and Opinions of Tristam Shandy 302)
Yorick likewise parcels outward with the aid of dashes as Sterne substitutes himself with
Yorick when he writes in his own letters. Just as Shandy lists the pageant of social roles
he encounters on his Grand Tour (IV.XX), Yorick in Sentimental Journey catalogues
travelers:
Simple Travellers,
Idle Travellers,
Inquisitive Travellers,
Lying Travellers,
Proud Travellers,
Vain Travellers,
Splenetic Travellers…
and last of all (if you please) The Sentimental Traveller.

(9)

60
We are tempted to place Woolf’s characters into Yorick’s categories – the inquisitive
Lily Briscoe, the hostess Clarissa Dalloway, the proud Mr. Ramsay – casting Woolf
herself as the actual “Sentimental Traveller,” who invents and inventories them. Woolf
casts her characters into role, and in doing so, her characters, too, cast themselves into
role. In Woolf’s work, forms as well as characters are catalogued, as with any
historiographer’s sources, as Shandy’s,
Accounts to reconcile:
Anecdotes to pick up
Inscriptions to make out:
Stories to weave in…

(I.XIV)

Sterne’s list microcosmically displays the texture of not only his novel, but also Woolf’s
work as a patchwork of formal fragments offering multiple journeys and travelers:
authorial dedications, a letter to The Times, doctor appointments, Peter Walsh’s letters,
Clarissa’s party and so on, all function through and because of travelers.
Sterne’s books were small enough to travel inside travelers’ pockets and
eventually gathered together cohering from the “opusculis” (‘little works’) referred to in
the Epigraph (V.III and IV) to the magnum opus Shandy published today. Orlando is
similarly presented as the gathering together of the source text: “We have done our best
to piece out a meager summary from the charred fragments that remain” (Orlando, 110).
Hazlitt too talks of needing to collate his travelling experiences, as if he were collating a
book: “I can make nothing out on the spot: - I must have time to collect myself” (On
going a journey’ 184).
Woolf adopts this trope in ‘Evening over Sussex’, as the multiple selves dispersed
along the car journey must be rounded up and recorded: “Now,” I said, “comes the
season of making up our accounts. Now we have got to collect ourselves; we have got to

61
be one self...”. Woolf is pulling together the body and mind that “were like scraps of torn
paper” in the description of Orlando “motoring fast out of London” (Orlando 276). Of
the episodic, multi-narrative structure of Between the Acts, Woolf wonders “if I can pull
it together” (Letters 6 486), and speculates that the reviewers will call Jacob’s Room “a
disconnected rhapsody” (DII 46)—again using Sterne’s language when Shandy’s
reference to his “rhapsodical work” (Tristam Shandy 33). As if anticipating both Hazlitt
and Woolf in his use of the ‘collecting’ trope, Sterne completes the trio’s concern:
…I am this moment walking across the market-place of Auxerre…and I am this
moment also entering Lyons with my post-chaise broke into a thousand pieces –
and I am moreover this moment in a handsome pavilion…rhapsodizing these
affairs.
Let me collect myself… (‘An Evening Over Sussex’ 30)
The three different narrative routes simultaneously tell of separate moments in the past,
and desire to meet: the “thousand pieces” of the experiencing, recollecting and writing
selves must cohere to provide the unified object with which the reader can sympathize.
The divided self, the disintegrated, dissociated personality, as she states in her diary, are
our “second selves” (DIII 12). As seen in Orlando, “Woolf rejects the notion of totally
integral personality as not merely inaccurate but unhealthy as well, since ‘unity’ seems so
often to entail having a single, overriding but partial and distorted self. An analogy is to
the sense of the androgynous self as a healthier than one that is ‘solely’ male or ‘solely’
female” (Beja 4).
Likewise, the end of Orlando, from the moment when the twentieth-century
violently imposes itself on Orlando’s consciousness through an explosion, is typical of
the modernist concern with unity in the midst of, or transcending, the multifariousness of
modern metropolitan life. While such symbols of speed and technique as the airplane, the

62
lift and the motorcar are evoked, Orlando faces fragmentation, dislocation and the
onslaught of the present. Her biographer, much like the common reader, at the end, is at a
loss to follow the erratic course of her thoughts during her rush through a department
store, through busy London streets, or during her frantic drive home. The biographer can
only disconsolately admit that “if there are (at a venture) seventy-six different times all
ticking in the mind at once,” there must be about two thousand and fifty-two people “all
having lodgment at one time or another” in Orlando’s mind (277). In the last chapter, as
Orlando’s identity becomes “a perfect rag-bag of odds and ends” (269–70), the syntax
itself becomes more and more dislocated, and the text is fraught with monosyllabic words
which are merely juxtaposed (“boys, boots, bath salts”). The omitted verbs, pronouns,
connectives and articles, which are typical of the stream of consciousness, are actually
meant to evoke the “chopping up small of identity” (276), in a technique reminiscent of
the cinematic montage. With its ability to present either more than one object or more
than one time simultaneously, montage was indeed “especially adaptable to fiction”
(Humphrey 121), and notably to modernist fiction, which aimed at projecting the duality
and the flux of mental life.
Orlando’s experience of modernity is the experience of speed and movement as
she has never experienced them before; hence her different perception of the world
around her. All her landmarks become obsolete. One sight triggers different memories
and a welter of sensations which are juxtaposed without really being linked: “Nothing is
no longer one thing. I take up a handbag and I think of an old bumboat woman frozen in
the ice” (274). Again, in a visual movement which could describe the movements of a
camera during shot/reverse shot and dissolve, Orlando understands that her different

63
perception of the present also means that her own self is no longer the same:
Everything was partly something else, as if her mind had become a forest with
glades branching here and there; things came nearer, and further, and mingled and
separated and made the strangest alliances and combinations in an incessant
chequer of light and shade. (Orlando 290)
Woolf attempts to subsume the discontinuity of the images of her life into a consistent
and homogeneous whole. Orlando’s last chapter is therefore an illustration of what
Woolf sensed the cinema could do if it could “breathe emotion into reality and animate
the perfect form with thoughts. . . . We should see these emotions mingling together and
affecting each other” (‘Cinema’ 271–72).
However, this “past,” “dislocate[d],” is in need of collection, as when Clarissa
Dalloway feels “glad he had done it; thrown it away. The clock was striking. The leaden
circles dissolved in the air. He made her feel the beauty; made her feel the fun. But she
must go back. She must assemble” (Mrs. Dalloway 186). After Clarissa seems to
reassemble, Woolf rushes her character back to the party, the collection of Clarissa’s
company, in order to end the novel. Clarissa must return, for she cannot sympathize with
Septimus any longer; the freedom, or “beauty,” is too alluring and unknown. Readers are
left wondering what had been thrown away. How does Clarissa facilitate return without a
single thought more of Septimus and, more importantly, does she remain the same
‘person’ once her mind-journey is over? What was the beauty or the fun, then? In
relation to Woolf’s other characters, Septimus merely becomes a discarded form of
interest that appears almost as quickly as he disappears. However, although the climax of
Mrs. Dalloway is her final party, when Clairssa is able to physically bring everyone
together as a whole, her temporary seclusion during the party in which she reflects upon
Septimus’ death becomes a question of communication. It is in this instant that Clarissa

64
is convinced that he has shown her “beauty” in his death. His death, furthermore, can be
understood as an act of communication: “Death is the place of true communication.
Clarissa has been attempting the impossible, to bring the values of death into the daylight
world of life. Septimus chose the right way” (Miller 68). He emerges “plunged holding
his treasure” (Mrs. Dalloway 281), his link to the deep places where each man is
connected to every other man, as displayed by the numerous times when “Evans,” his
friend from the dead, speaks out to him. By killing himself, Septimus not only preserves
his integrity, but also forces Clarissa to realize how factitious all her attempt to
“assemble” and to “connect” have been. “Communication,” Woolf writes in Mrs.
Dalloway, “is health; communication is happiness” (141). Furthermore, his final act of
suicide constitutes a recognition that communication cannot be attained except
evanescently in life, if at all.
Clarissa’s short-lived recognition of his “truth,” her moment of selfcondemnation, is simultaneously the moment of her greatest insight:
She had once thrown a shilling into the Serpentine, never anything more. But he
had flung it away. They went on living … They (all day she had been thinking of
Bourton, of Peter, of Sally), they would grow old. A thing there was that
mattered; a thing, wreathed about with chatter, defaced, obscured in her own life,
let drop every day in corruption, lies chatter. This he had preserved. Death was
defiance.. Death was an attempt to communicate; people feeling the impossibility
of reaching the centre which, mystically evaded them; closeness drew apart;
rapture faded, one was alone. There was an embrace in death. (280-281)
As Miller notes, “From this point of view the thing at the center that matters most, all
speech, all social action, all building it up, all forms of communication, are lies” (Miller
68). Like the fantasy in ‘Lappin and Lappinova,’ it is false. The more one tries to reach
this “centre” through such means, the further away from it one becomes. The “ultimate

65
lesson,” Miller further notes, “is that by building it up, one destroys” (68). Again, one
encounters the mix-match of opposing forces: the action of building, is actually, or also,
the action of destroying, in which one can replace the over, be the process to access the
‘other,’ also suggesting the opposite: both cannot ‘be’ at the same time. Therefore, only
by throwing it away can life be preserved; laid to rest on the underlying reality which
Woolf elsewhere describes as a “thing I see before me: something abstract; but residing
in the downs or sky; beside which nothing matters; in which I shall rest and continue to
exist. Reality I call it” (Dairy 129). She continues, later, with this thought: “Nothing
matters” compared to her “reality,” for it is groomed by all the simple activities of life,
which, like formal narrative, restrain and maintain. “There is nothing,” (141) she writes
during one of her spouts of depression, “nothing for any of us. Work, reading, writing
are all disguises; and relations with people.” The “disguises” are the constrains we must
submissively accept in fear of not finding a ‘role’ to cast ourselves into. The fear,
furthermore, is of it all being a fantasy; this, perhaps, is too illusive for the individual to
reconcile with. Instead, our indulgences with “fantasy” are when we watch television,
read fiction, play dress-up. In these types of places and spheres, the dalliance with
fantasy is allowed because the place and sphere itself. And still, Woolf suggests, we cast
ourselves into roles—the eager college student, the mean professor, the eldest child—for
a purpose. How many roles/journeys, then, must one we go through/on until we find our
‘self’?

“Fear no more the heat o’ the’ sun
Nor the furious winter’s rages”

66
Originating from Shakespeare’s Cymbeline, the lyrics above are echoed to
Clarissa in the beginning and end of Mrs. Dalloway: first, when she reads the words in a
bookshop window during her shopping excursion and second during her party. The lines
from the funeral dirge suggest that death is not a thing to be feared, but rather it should be
seen as a relief from the hard struggles within life; in turn, it is not necessarily
exclusively mimetic of Septimus’s death, but of the post- feelings of World War I. While
Clarissa is coming to terms with her own aging and eventual death, these lines follow her.
The words can be said to “foreshadow” the death of Septimus, who repeats them right
before his suicide. If one remembers the passages earlier in this paper, Septimus remarks
in his moment before death,
Now for his writings; how the dead sing behind rhododendron bushes; odes to
Time; conversations with Shakespeare; Evans, Evans, Evans—his message from
the dead; do not cut down trees; tell the Prime Minister. Universal love: the
meaning of the world. Burn them! He cried.
Clarissa’s acknowledgement of the words from Shakespeare indicates her half-conscious
awareness that in spite of her love of life she will reach peace only in death. Because the
words appear in her mind moments before she returns to her role as hostess, they suggest
her recognition of her “kinship with Septimus, her kinship with death,” for as Woolf’s
diary states, Clarissa is a “double” with Septimus: “I want to give life and death, sanity
and insanity” (DII 56). However the two poles are not so much opposite; instead, they
are reversed images of one another. Both have the same elemental character design, both
seek communication, and desire wholeness, the “oneness of reality”; however, Woolf
suggests that only Septimus finds the pure way to reach it. It is a journey in either
reconciling many selves, ignoring ‘other’ selves or ending all ‘selves’ in order to create
one self, the dead ‘self.’ Clarissa’s attempt to create unity in her party is the mirror

67
image in the world of light and life of Septimus’ vigorous appropriation of the dark
embrace of death in his suicide: “Fear no more the heat of the sun,” she thinks, “She must
go back to them. But what an extraordinary night! She felt somehow very like him—the
young man who had killed himself. She felt glad he had done it; thrown it away” (283).
As Miller notes, Woolf felt that the visible world of light and life was a
mirror image or repetition in reverse of an invisible world of darkness and death.
Only the former can be described. Death is incompatible with language, but by
talking about life, one can talk indirectly about death.
(Miller 69)
While Miller writes “only the former can be described,” he forgets to add “by the latter.”
Mrs. Dalloway ends in a confrontation between life and death as “looking-glass
counterparts.” Reality, completion, authenticity are on the “death” side of the mirror,
with its illusory, insubstantial, and fragmentary images of that dark reality.
Moments earlier, Clarissa’s thoughts about the old lady she can see from her
window reveals her concern with where the woman is moving:
Big Ben struck the half-hour. ... [the old lady] was forced, so Clarissa imagined,
by that sound, to move, to go—but where? Clarissa tried to follow her as she
turned and disappeared, and could still just see her white cap moving at the back
of the bedroom. She was still there moving about at the other end of the room.
(139)
Clarissa is forced into ‘dream-land’ while she is alone in her room, yet does not have the
correct ‘sympathy’ to engage with the woman correctly; she is, indeed, looking at the
woman through two sets of glass windows. Clarissa establishes the existence of a woman
in a bedroom, moving, without ever meeting her; mere sight is all she needs in order to
create an object of attention. Her reality of the woman is encounter-less, forcing it to be
contingent on the old lady’s actual movements. Space and the sense of ‘being’ are
revealed by movement. When Clarissa is unable to see what the old lady is doing once

68
she moves from Clarissa’s peripheral vision, Woolf suggests the limitations of one’s
point of view and level of sympathetic engagement.
Clarissa, in particular, cannot grasp what it fees like, when she is not there, or
unable to be seen:
Did it matter, then, she asked herself, walking towards Bond Street, did it matter
that she must inevitably cease completely; all this must go on without her ... did
she resent it; or did it not become consoling to believe that death ended
absolutely? but that somehow in the streets of London, on the ebb and flow of
things, here, there, she survived.
(9)
Clarissa’s meditation on ‘being’ in reality distances Woolf from her narration. In ‘The
Cinema,’ Woolf imagines what that life looks like when one is not there to see it:
They have become not more beautiful in the sense in which pictures are beautiful,
but shall we call it ... more real, or real with a different reality from that which we
perceive in daily life? We behold them as they are when we are not there. We see
life as it is when we have no part in it. As we gaze we seem to be removed from
the pettiness of actual existence. ... From this point of vantage ... as we watch ...
we have time to feel pity and amusement, to generalize ... Watching the boat sail
and the wave break, we have time to open our minds wide to beauty and register
on top of it the queer sensation—this beauty will continue, and this beauty will
flourish whether we behold it or not.
(268)
In ‘The Cinema,’ Woolf is able to imagine what life looks like when one is absent, as
when Mrs. Ramsay looks back at her dinner table and sees her family enjoying their meal
just as much as when she was present in the room. Clarissa, too, in her relationship with
her neighbor, which is encounter-less but mutually acknowledged-- viewer and viewed-reader and writer, become interchanged partners on an inherently reckless journey, for the
encounter it postulates will always be, in some sense, ‘missed.’ The knowledge that the
event began without us opens our minds wider to beauty than any sense of command, of
being throughout fully present and correct, ever could. What Woolf saw in the potential
of cinema, Clarissa can’t see in the lady across the street, or in any other event—she is

69
unable to grasp that the days will continue, even in her absence. London will remain and
Big Ben will continue to chime.
However, Clarissa’s vitality—i.e. her ability “to be; to exist”—is first expressed
in the present-tense statement made by Peter Walsh in the second to last line of the novel:
“It is Clarissa.” The affirmation of her power to conclude the moment echoes earlier
descriptions of her “extraordinary gift, that woman’s gift … there she was.” However,
the earlier passages are in the past tense, as is the last line of the novel: “For there she
was.” With this sentence “is” becomes “was” in the indirect discourse of the narrator.
As Miller put it, “In that mode of language Clarissa along with all the other characters
recedes into an indefinitely distant past. Life becomes death within the impersonal mind
of the narrator and within her language, which is the place of communion in death.”
Miller argues,
There, the fragmentary is made whole. There all is assembled into one unit. All
the connections between one part of the novel and another are known only within
the embrace of that reconciling spirit and through the power of her words. (55)
*
Woolf’s drive through Sussex ends when she realizes that “Nothing is to be seen
any more”; the writer and reader have had their fill of narrative’s landscape, and must
return home. Woolf is the “grave, formal, see-saw character” (218) Sterne outlines in a
1765 letter. She zigzags between aligning herself with Sterne’s audacity – criticizing H.
Brewster in a 1931 letter to Trautmann Banks, because he “doesn’t plunge and stumble
and jump at boughs beyond his grasp”– and disapproving of Sterne’s antics. He does not
take the responsibilities of form and character seriously enough, forcing her to question
whether the journey of sympathy is worthwhile: “The difficulty with Virginia was to find

70
any play sufficiently absorbing” (Beginning Again 233), Leonard Woolf writes. Sterne’s
“high pressure” (‘Sterne’ 280) characters are, for (V) Woolf, often over-cooked and in
need of regulation: “The truth is that we cannot live happily in such fine air for long, and
that we begin to become conscious of limitations…” (ibid), such as our forced character
role-play. The irony remains that Sterne was confined to the domestic sphere during his
famous years through illness; Shandy’s far-flung and far-fetched mental roaming is a
substitution for his lack of physical adventuring. Yet, the fact remains that Sterne left
Shandy inside his book. In other words, Sterne doesn’t cast himself into Shandy’s role
because he is physically and mentally unable to; thus, he writes of Shandy’s journey
because it is the only way to enjoy a fantasy that he is unable to be in. To this extent
Woolf, another intermittent invalid, sympathizes with him: “the only exciting life is the
imaginary one” (DIII 126) because it is the one that has the least amount of restrictions.
In the imagination, real time and place can evaporate and the self is extinguished. Like a
dream, we are able to roam freely, untamed, uncharted and alone. No one is with us in
our imagination; it is the perfect journey.
While Sterne’s problematizing of the zigzagging quest for sympathy is an
exercise in narrative, for Woolf it is a hazardous enterprise. Despite their differences,
though, both achieve Woolf’s ideal to map “all the traces of the minds passage through
the world…by means of infinite discords” (DI 393).

71

JOURNEY’S END
The reality was outside the world, in the human heart. And her literary method, based on
this philosophy, was not to deal explicitly with a situation, but rather to present the
shadows it cast in the individual consciousness. When the last shadows had moved
across the screen, and when the attentive reader had caught a glimpse of something
motionless behind them—‘this peace, this rest, this eternity’—Mrs. Woolf had nothing
more to say. Her story had ended without having begun.
(Cowley 24)
Thus, the works of Virginia Woolf pose the question of authorial purpose: what was
Woolf attempting to accomplish? Her shuffles between critic and novelist and shift from a
late nineteenth century writer to an early modernist thinker arose synonymously with the
transition to a new complexity and self-consciousness in the use of narrative devices. In
particular, her stream of consciousness technique, dissolution of the traditional limits of plot
and character, attention to “minutiae” of the mind and the external world, “pulverization” of
experience into a multitude of fragmentary particles, each without apparent connection to
others, and lastly, termination of the common boundaries between mind and world (Miller
53), are suggestive of her narrative and character innovations as a novelist that later become
characteristic of her narrative style.
While this journey has come to an end, Woolf, like Sterne and Hazlitt, is cast as
“figure of the past” (Beja 1). Yet like Woolf’s characters, our impressions are not left
completely behind. Although it has often been pointed out that Woolf’s method had
“little to do with that of the ordinary novel,” having “no conflict in her books,” “no sense
of drama or dialectic,” and “no progress through difficulties toward marriage or a
deathbed,” journeying through her works, even if “there is not even a story” (Cowley
24), leaves stamps of impressions, wonders and fascinations. Never answered, of course,

72
and to which there will never be satisfaction, the eager reader will always question if
Woolf, “in her heart,” actually believed in her stories.
However fragmented her work may appear, it belongs together as writing. Quite
aware of the difference between her characters and those of Charles Dickens and Jane
Austen, this is her own form of ‘tradition.’ Woolf replaces conventional nineteenthcentury principles and brings about a transition, revealing other objects and directions of
attention. Her shifts in narrative, time, character and form suggest her own approach,
much like Sterne, to fiction.

73

NOTES
1

These are paraphrased definitions collected from the Oxford English Dictionary and
Dictionary.com
2
Strangely enough, I have just noticed that Mrs. Hilbery appears in Mrs. Dalloway.
However, I do not know if there is a connection.
3
“The Hours” was Woolf’s working title for Mrs. Dalloway.
4
Unanimism is a movement in French Literature in the early 1900s. Primarily, it is based
on ideas of collective consciousness and collective emotion, and on crowd behavior,
where members of the group do or think something simultaneously. Woolf was aware of
this, as displayed by the quote from Mrs. Dalloway.

Works Cited
Aiken, Conrad. "The Novel as Work of Art [To the Lighthouse]." 1958. Critical Essays
on Virginia Woolf. Ed. Morris Beja. Boston: G.K. Hall &, 1986. 15-17. Print.
Anonymous. "Review of the Waves." 1931. Critical Essays on Virginia Woolf. Ed.
Morris Beja. Boston: G.K. Hall &, 1985. 19-21. Print.
Beja, Morris. "Introduction." Introduction. Critical Essays on Virginia Woolf. Boston:
G.K. Hall &, 1985. 1-9. Print.
Bennett, Joan. "Characters and Human Beings." Virginia Woolf: Her Art as a Novelist.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1964. 19-41. Print.
Birrell, Augustine. English Men of Letters: William Hazilitt. London: MacMillan and,
1926. Print.
Bloom, Harold. "Prophets of Sensibility: Precursors of Modern Cultural Thought."
Introduction. Literary Remains of the Late William Hazlitt. Ed. Harold Bloom. By
William Hazlitt. New York: Chelsea House, 1983. Print.
Cowley, Malcolm. "England Under Glass [Between the Acts]." 1941. Critical Essays on
Virginia Woolf. Ed. Morris Beja. Boston: G.K. Hall &, 1985. 23-25. Print.
Dally, Peter. The Marriage of Heaven and Hell: Manic Depression and the Life of
Virginia Woolf. New York: St. Martin's, 1999. Print.
Dick, Susan. "Literary Realism in Mrs Dalloway, To the Lighthouse, Orlando and The
Waves." The Cambridge Companion to Virginia Woolf. Ed. Sue Roe and Susan Sellars.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2000. 50-71. Print.

74

Fleishman, Avrom. "A Virgin Forest in Each." 1975. Critical Essays on Virginia Woolf.
Boston: G.K. Hall &, 1985. 107-30. Print.
Forester, E.M. Virginia Woolf. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1942. Print.
Forster, E. M. "Virginia Woolf." The Bloomsbury Group: A Collection of Memoirs and
Commentary. Ed. S. P. Rosenbaum. Toronto: University of Toronto, 1995. 222-36. Print.
Harris, Alexandra. Virginia Woolf: Her Art as a Novelist. New York: Thames & Hudson,
2011. Print.
Hazlitt, William. "On Going A Journey." Table Talk: Essays on Men and Manners. Ed.
William Rew Hazlitt. London: George Bell & Sons, 1878. 249-61. Print.
---. The Round Table: A Collection of Essays on Literature, Men, and Manners. Ed.
William Hazlitt JR. Vol. 3. London: John Templeman, 1841. Print.
---. "Why Distant Objects Please." Table-Talk: Essays On Men And Manners. Ed.
William Crew Hazlitt. London: George Bell & Sons, 1878. 356-58. Print.
Humphrey, Robert. Stream of Consciousness in the Modern Novel. Berkley: University of
California, 1968. Print.
Lawall, Sarah N. Critics of Consciousness. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1968. Print.
MacLean, Kenneth. "Imagination and Sympathy: Sterne and Adam Smith." Journal of
the History of Ideas 10.3 (Jun. 1949): 399-410. JSTOR. Web. Dec. 2011.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2707044>.
McNally, Richard J. "Recovering Memories of Trauma: A View from the Laboratory."
Current Directions in Psychological Science 12.1 (2003): 32-35. JSTOR. Web.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/20182827>.
Miller, J. Hillis. "Mrs. Dalloway: Repetition as the Raising of the Dead." Critical Essays
on Virginia Woolf. Comp. Morris Beja. Boston: G.K. Hall &, 1985. 53-73. Print.
Muir, Edwin. "Review of The Years." Rev. of The Years. Listener 31 Mar. 1937: 622-23.
Print.
New, Melvyn. Tristram Shandy: A Book for Free Spirits. New York: Twayne, 1994.
Print.
Reviron-Piégay, Floriane. "Translating Generic Liberties: Orlando on Page and Screen."
Biography 32.2 (2009): 316-39. Project Muse. Web.
Schulkind, Jeanne. "Introduction." Introduction. Moments of Being: Unpublished

75

Autobiographical Writings. By Virginia Woolf. Sussex: UP, 1976. 7-24. Print.
Smith, Adam. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Raphael and Macfie, 1976. Print.
Sterne, Laurence. A Sentimental Journey. New York: Penguin Classics, 2002. Print.
---. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman. Ed. Joan New, Melvyn New,
and Christopher Ricks. New York: Penguin Classics, 1997. Print.
Suedfeld, Peter. "Reactions to Societal Trauma: Distress And/or Eustress." Political
Psychology 18.4 (1997): 849-61. JSTOR. Web. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/3792213>.
Trotter, David. "Virginia Woolf and Cinema." Film Studies 6 (Summer 2005): 13-26.
Print.
Whitworth, Michael H. Virginia Woolf. Oxford: Oxford Univ., 2005. Print.
Woolf, Leonard. Beginning Again. London: Hogarth, 1963. Print.
Woolf, Virginia, and Andrew McNeillie. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume I: 19041912. London: Hogarth, 1986. Print.
Woolf, Virginia, and Lawrence Miller. The Voyage Out. Ed. C. Ruth Miller. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell, 1996. Print.
Woolf, Virginia. Between the Acts. London: Hogarth, 1941. Print.
---. Collected Essays: Volume IV. London: Hogarth, 1967. Print.
---. "Craftsmanship." 1937. The Death of the Moth and Other Essays. London: Hogarth,
1942. 198-207. Print.
---. "De Quincey’s Autobiography." The Common Reader, Second Series. London:
Hogarth, 1942. 132-207. Print.
---. "Happiness." 1922-1925. The Complete Shorter Fiction of Virginia Woolf. Ed. Susan
Dick. Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985. 172-74. Print.
---. "Evening Over Sussex: Reflections in a Motor Car." Collected Essays of Virginia
Woolf. Oxford: Benediction Classics, 2011. 28-30. Print.
---. "Journeys in Spain." 1905. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume I: 1904-1912. Ed.
Andrew McNellie. London: Hogarth, 1986. 44-46. Print.
---. "Lappin and Lapinova." 1926-1941. The Complete Shorter Fiction of Virginia Woolf.

76

Ed. Susan Dick. Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985. 255-62. Print.
---. Moments of Being: Unpublished Autobiographical Writings. Ed. Jeanne Schulkind.
Sussex: UP, 1976. Print.
---. Mrs. Dalloway. Ed. Morris Beja. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996. Print.
---. "On Being Ill." 1930. Collected Essays: Volume IV. London: Hogarth, 1967. 193-203.
Print.
---. Orlando: A Biography. London: Hogarth, 1928. Print.
---. Pointz Hall: The Earlier and Later Typescripts of Between the Acts. Ed. Mitchell A.
Leska. New York: University Publications, 1983. Print.
---. "Sterne." 1909. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume I: 1904-1912. Ed. Andrew
McNellie. London: Hogarth, 1986. 280-88. Print.
---. "Street Haunting: A London Adventure." 1930. Collected Essays: Volume IV.
London: Hogarth, 1967. 155-66. Print.
---. "Sympathy." 1917-1921. The Complete Shorter Fiction of Virginia Woolf. Ed. Susan
Dick. Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985. 102-05. Print.
---. "The Cinema." 1926. Collected Essays. Ed. Leonard Woolf. Vol. 2. London: Chatto
& Windus, 1966. 268-72. Print.
---. The Complete Shorter Fiction of Virginia Woolf. Ed. Susan Dick. Orlando: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1985. Print.
---. "The Death of the Moth." Collected Essays of Virginia Woolf. Oxford: Benediction
Classics, 2011. 25-27. Print.
---. The Diary of Virginia Woolf Volume I: 1915-1919. Ed. Anne Oliver Bell. London:
Hogarth, 1977. Print.
---. The Diary of Virginia Woolf Volume II: 1920-1924. Ed. Anne Oliver Bell. London:
Hogarth, 1978. Print.
---. The Diary of Virginia Woolf Volume III: 1925-1930. Ed. Anne Oliver Belle. London:
Horgarth, 1980. Print.
---. The Diary of Virginia Woolf Volume V: 1936-1941. Ed. Anne Olivier. Bell. London:
Hogarth, 1984. Print.

77

---. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume 5: 1929-1932. Ed. Stuart N. Clarke. London:
Random House, 2009. Print.
---. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume II: 1912-1918. Ed. Andrew McNeillie. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987. Print.
---. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume III: 1919-1924. Ed. Andrew McNeillie.
London: Hogarth, 1988. Print.
---. "The Journal of Miss Joan Martyn." The Complete Shorter Fiction of Virginia Woolf.
Ed. Susan Dick. Orlando: Harcourt, 1989. 33-63. Print.
---. "The Love of Reading." 1931. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume V: 1929-1932.
Ed. Stuart N. Clarke. London: Hogarth, 2009. 271-75. Print.
---. "The 'Movie' Cinema." 1918. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume II: 1912-1918.
Ed. Andrew McNellie. Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987. 288-91. Print.
---. "The 'Sentimental Journey'" 1932. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume V: 19291932. Ed. Stuart Clarke. London: Hogarth, 2009. 401-09. Print.
---. "'The Sentimental Traveller'" 1908. The Essays of Virginia Woolf Volume I: 19041912. Ed. Andrew McNellie. London: Hogarth, 1986. 157-59. Print.
---. The Voyage Out. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1948. Print.
---. The Waves. Oxford: Oxford City, 2009. Print.
---. To The Lighthouse. Orlando: Harcourt, 1981. Print.
---. "William Hazlitt." The Common Reader, Second Series. London: L. & Virginia
Woolf at the Hogarth, 1932. Print.
Wright, Eric R., Dustin E. Wright, Brea L. Perry, and Carrie E. Foote-Ardah. "Stigma
and the Sexual Isolation of People with Serious Mental Illness." Social Problems 54.1
(2007): 78-98. Print.

